THB

INCREDULITY OF FATHER BROWN




THE INCREDULITY
OF FATHER BROWN

ty G. K. CHESTERTON ^ <«




CASSELL AND COMPANY, LTD
London, Toronto, Melbourne and Sydney



First published Jumm 1936
Secom^ xped


JTrinicd in Great Sritain



P^WXRICI^ BURKE




CONTENTS


rAOR

1. The Resurrection of Father Brown i

2. The Arrow of Heaven . . >31

3. The Oracle of the Doo ... 71

4. The Miracle of Moon Crescent . 106

5. The Curse of the Golden Cross . 145

6. The Dagger with Wings . . . 188

7. The Doom of the Darnaways . . 225

8. The Ghost of Gideon Wise . . 266



NOTE^! do not know if it is neassorf to sny^ of storia so slight^
Hunt tki nrchnology and history an largeh assumed for the sake of
tie story^ Problems of a very similar sort do exist; but / haofe
deliberately avoided reproducing any real one*



THE INCREDULITY OF
FATHER BROWN

I

THE RESURRECTION OF
FATHER BROWN

Thzrb was a brief period during which Father
Brown enjoyed, or ra^er did not enjoy, something
like fame. He was a nine days’ wonder in the
newspapers ; he was even a common topic of con-
troversy in the weekly reviews ; his exploits were
narrated eagerly and inaccurately in any number of
clubs and drawing-rooms, especially in Americaf
Incongruous and indeed incredible as it may seem
to anyone who knew him, his adventures as a
detective were even made the subject of short stories
appearing in magazines.

Strangely enough, this wandering limelight
struck him in the most obscvo^ or at least the most
remote, of his many places of residence. He ha4
been sent out to officiate, as something betweea
a missionary and 'a parish priest, in one of those

I



The Incredulity of Father Brown

sections of the northern coast of South America,
where strips of country still cling insecurely to
European powers, or are continually threatening
to become independent republics, under the gigantic
shadow of President Monroe. The population
was red and brown with pink spots ; that is, it was
Spanish'American, and largely Spanish-American-
Indian, but there was a considerable and mcreasing
infiltration of Americans of the northern sort —
Englishmen, Germans and the rest. And the
trouble seems to have begun when one of these
visitors, very recently landed and very much
annoyed at having lost one of his bags, approached
the first building of which he came in sight ; which
happened to be the mission-house and chapel
attached to it, in front of which ran a long veranda
and a long row of stakes, up which were trained
the black twisted vines, their square leaves red with
autumn. Behind them, also in a row, a number of
<human bemgs sat almost as rigid as the stakes and
coloured in some fashion like the vines. For while
their broad-brimmed hats were as black as their
unblinking eyes, the complexions of many of them
might have ^n made out of the dark red timber
of those transatlantic forests. Many of them were
smoking very long thin black cigars ; and in all
that group the smoke was almost the only moving
^ing. The visitor would probably have described
them as natives, though some of them wem very



The Resurrection of Father Brown

proud of Spanish blood. But he was not one to
^w any fine distinction between Spaniards and
Red Indians, being rather disposed to dismiss
people from the scene when once he had convicted
them of being native to it.

He was a newspaper man from Kansas City*
a lean, light-haired man with what Meredith call^
an adventurous nose ; one could almost fiuicy it
found its way by feeling its way and moved like
the proboscis of an ant-eater. His name was
Snaith, and his parents, after some obscure medi-
tation, had called him Saul, a fact which he had the
good feeling to conceal as far as possible. Indeed,
he had ultimately compromised by calling himself
Paul, though by no means for the same reason that
had affected the Apostle of the Gentiles. On the
contrary, so far as he had any views on such things,
the name of the persecutor would have been more
appropriate ; for he regarded organized rdigion
with the conventional contempt which can be leamf
more easily fi-om Ingersoll than from Voltaire.
And this was, as it happened, the not very important
side of his character which he turned towards the
mission station and the groups in front of the
veranda. Something in their shameless repose and
indifference inflamed his own fury of efficiency; and
as he could get no particular answer to his first
questions, he began to do all the talking himself.

Standijig out there in the strong sunshine, «
3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

spick and span figure in his Panama hat and neat
clothes, his grip-sack held in a steely grip, he began
to shout at the people in the shadow. He began
to explain to them very loudly why they were lazy
and ^thy and bestially ignorant and lower than
the beasts that perish, in case this problem should
have previously exercised their minds. In his
opinion it was the deleterious influence of priests
that had made them so miserably poor and so hope-
lessly oppressed that they were able to sit in the
shade and smoke and do nothing.

“And a mighty soft crowd you must be at
that,*' he said, “ to be bullied by these stuck-up
josses because they walk about in their mitres and
their tiaras and their gold copes and other glad
rags, looking down on everybody else like dirt —
being bamboozled by crowns and canopies and sacred
umbrellas like a kid at a pantomime ; just because
a pompous old High Priest of Mumbo-Jumbo
4ooks as if he was the lord of the earth. What
about you ? What do you look like, you poor
simps ? 1 tell you that’s why you’re way-back in

barbarism a^can’t read or write and ’’

At this point the High Priest of Mumbo-Jumbo
came in an undignified hurry out of the door of the
mission house, not looking very like a lord of the
earth, but rather like a bundle of black second-hand
Clothes buttoned round a short bolster in the sem-
blance of a guy. He was not wearing his tiara,

4



The Resurrection of Rather Brown

supposing him to possess one, but a shabby broad
hat not very dissimilar from those of the Spanish
Indians, and it was thrust to the back of his head
with a gesture of botheration. He seemed just
about to speak to the motionless natives when he
caught sight of the stranger and said quickly :

Oh, can I be of any assistance ? Would you
like to come inside ? "

Mr. Paul Snaith came inside ; and it was the
beginning of a considerable increase of that jour-
nalist's information on many things. Presumably
his journalistic instinct was stronger than his pre-
judices, as, indeed, it often is in clever journalists ;
and he asked a good many questions , the answers
to which interested and surprised him. He dis-
covered that the Indians could read and write, for
the simple reason that the priest had taught them ;
but that they did not read or write any mow Haem
they could help, from a natural preference lbs UMM
direct communications. He learned tittt iteif
strange people, who sat about in heaps S& <i|il
veranda without stirring a hair, could work* qsnte
hard on their own patches of land ; especisfiy those
of them who were more than half Spanish ; and
he learned with still more astonishment that they
all had patches of land that were really their own.
That much was part of a stubborn tradition thact
seemed quite native to natives. But in that also
the priest had played a certain part ; and by doing

5



The Incredulity of Father Brown

so had taken perhaps what was his first and last
part in politicsy if it was only local politics. There
had recently swept through that region one of
those fevers of atheist and almost anarchist Radi-
calism which break out periodically in countries of
the Latin culture, generally beginning in a secret
society and generally ending in a civil war and in
very little else. The local leader of the iconoclastic
party was a certain Alvarez, a rather picturesque
adventurer of Portuguese nationality but, as his
enemies said, of partly negro origin, the head of
any number of lodges and temples of initiation, of
the sort that in such places clothe even atheism
with something mystical. The leader on the more
conservative side was a much more commonplace
person, a very wealthy man named Mendoza, the
owner of many factories and quite respectable, but
not very exciting. It was the general opinion that
the cause of law and order would have been entirely
lost if it had not adopted a more popular policy of
its own, in the form of securing land for the peas-
ants ; and this nravement had mainly originated
from the little mission station of Father Brown.

While he was talking to the journalist, Mendoza,
the Conservative leader, came in. He was a stout,
dark man, with a bald head like a pear and a round
body also like a pear ; he was smoking a very
fragrant cigar, but he threw it away, perhaps a little
theatrically, when he came into the presence of the

6



The Resurrection of Father Browns

priest, as if he had been entering church ; and^
bowed with a curve that in so corpulent a gentleman
seemed quite improbable. He was always exceed*
ingly serious in his social gestures, especially to-
wards religious institutions. He was one of those
laymen who are much more ecclesiastical than
ecclesiastics. It embarrassed Father Brown a good
deal, especially when carried thus into private life.

“ I think I am an anti-clerical,” Father Brown
would say with a faint smile, ” but there wouldn’t
be half so much clericalism if they would only
leave things to the clerics.”

“ Why, Mr. Mendoza,” exclaimed the journal-
ist with a new animation, ” I think we have met
before. Weren’t you at the Trade Congress in
Mexico last year ? ”

The heavy eyelids of Mr. Mendoza showed a
flutter of recognition, and he smiled in his slow way.
” I remember.” ^

” Pretty big business done there in an 'hour or
two,” said Snaith with relish. “ Made a good deal
of difference to you, too, I guess.”

“ I have been very fortunate,” said Mendoza
modestly.

“ Don’t you believe it I ” cried the enthusiastic
Snaith. ” Good fortune comes to the people who
know when to catch hold ; and you cai^ht hold good
and sure. But I hope I’m not interrupting your
business ? ”



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ Not at all,” said the other. I often have the
honour of calling on the padre for a little talk.
Merely for a little talk.”

It seemed as if this ftuniliarity between Father
Brown and a successful and even ftmom man of
btisiness completed the reconciliation between the
priest and the practical Mr. Snaith. He felt, it
might be supposed, a new respectability clothe the
station and the mission, and was ready to overlook
such occasional reminders of the existence of
religion as a chapel and a presb)rtery can seldom
wholly avoid. He became quite enthusiastic about
the priest’s programme — at least on its secular and
social side ; and announced himself ready at any
moment to act in the capacity of live wire for its
communication to the world at large. And it was
at this point that Father Brown began to find the
journalist rather more troublesome in his sympathy
than in his hostility.

Mr. Paul Snaith set out vigorously to feature
Father Brown. He sent long and loud eulogies on
him across the continent to his newspaper in the
Middle West. He took snapshots of the unfor-
tunate cleric in the most commonplace occupations
and exhibited them in gigantic photographs in the
gigantic Sunday papers of the United States. He
turned his sayings into slogans, and was continually
presenting ^e world with “ A Message ” from
the reverend eendeman in South America. Any

8



The Resurrection of Father Brown

stock less strong and strenuously receptive than the
American race would have become very much bored
with Father Brown. As it was, he received hand-
some and eager offers to go on a lecturing tour in
the States ; and when he declined the terms were
raised with expressions of respectful wonder. A
series of stories about him, like the stories of Sher-
•lock Holmes, were, by the instrumentality of Mr.
Snaith, planned out and put before the hero with
requests for his assistance and encouragement. As
the priest found they had started, he could offer no
suggestion except that they should stop. And this
in turn was taken by Mr. Snaith as the text for a
discussion on whether Father Brown should dis-
appear temporarily over a cliff, in the manner of
Dr. Watson’s hero. To all these demands the priest
had patiently to reply in writing, saying that he
would consent on such terms to the temporary ces-
sation of the stories and begging that a consider-
able interval might occur before they began again ,
The notes he wrote grew shorter and shorter ;
and as he wrote the last of them, he sighed.

Needless to say, this strange boom in the North
reacted on the little outpost in the South where he
had expected to live in so lonely an exile. The con-
siderable English and American population already
on the spot began to be proud of possessing so
widely advertised a person. American tourists, of
the sort who land with a loud demand for West-
s 9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

minster Abbey, landed on that distant coast mth a
loud demand for Father Brown. They were within
measurable distance of running excursion trains
named after him, and bringing crowds to see him
as if he were a public monument. He was especi-
ally troubled by the active and ambitious new
traders and shopkeepers of the place, who were
perpetually pestering him to try their wares and to
give them testimonials. Even if the testimonials
were not forthcoming, they would prolong the
correspondence for the purpose of collecting auto-
graphs. As he was a good-natured person they got
a good deal of what they wanted out of him ; and
it was in answer to a particular request from a
Frankfort wine-merchant named Eckstein that he
wrote hastily a few words on a card, which were to
prove a terrible turning-point in his life.

Eckstein was a fussy little man with fuzzy hair
and pince-nez, who was wildly anxious that the
priest should not only try some of his celebrated
medicinal port, but should let him know where and
when he would drink it, in acknowledging its receipt.
The priest was not particularly surprised at the
request, for he was long past surprise at the lunacies
of advertisement. So he scribbled something down
and turned to other business which seemed a little
more sensible. He was again interrupted, by a
note from no less a person than his political enemy
Alvarez, asking him to come to a conference at

lO



The Resurrection of Father Brown

which it was hoped that a compromise on an out-
standing question might be reached ; and suggest-
ing an appointment that evening at a cafff just
outside the walls of the little town. To this also he
sent a message of accepmnce by the rather florid
and military messenger who was waiting for it ;
and then, having an hour or two before him, sat
*down to attempt to get through a little of his own
legitimate business. At the end of the time he
poured himself out a glass of Mr. Eckstein’s re.
markable wine and, glancing at the clock with a
humorous expression, drank it and went out into
the night.

Strong moonlight lay on the little Spanish town,
so that when he came to the picturesque gateway*
with its rather rococo arch and the fantastic fringe
of palms beyond it, it looked rather like a scene in
a Spanish opera. One long leaf of palm with jagged
edges, black against the moon, hung down on the
other side of the arch, visible through the archway,*
and had something of the look of the jaw of a black
crocodile. The fancy would not have lingered in
his imagination but for something else that caught
his naturally alert eye. The air was deathly s^l,
and there was not a stir of unnd ; but he distinctly
saw the pendent palm-leaf move.

He looked around him and realized that he was
alone. He had left behind the bst houses, which
were mostly closed and shuttered, and was walking



The Incredulity of Father Brown

between two long blank walls built of large and
shapeless but flattened stones, tufted here and there
with the queer prickly weeds of that region — ^walls
which ran parallel all the way to the gateway. He
could not see the lights of the caf£ outside the
gate ; probably it was too far away. Nothing could
be seen under the arch but a wider expanse of
large-flagged pavement, pale in the moon, with the
straggling prickly pear here and there. He had a
strong sense of the smell of evil ; he felt queer
physical oppression ; but he did not think of stop-
ping. His courage, which was considerable, was
perhaps even less strong a part of him than his
curiosity. All his life he had been led by an intel-
lectual hunger for the truth, even of trifles. He
often controlled it in the name of proportion ; but
it was always there. He walked straight through
the gateway ; and on the other side a man sprang
like a monkey out of the treetop and struck at him
•with a knife. At the same moment another man
came crawling swiftly along the wall and, whirling
a cudgel round his head, brought it down. Father
Brown turned, staggered, and sank in a heap ; but
as he sank there dawned on his round face an
expression of mild and immense surprise.

There was living in the same little town at this
time another young American, particularly different
from Mr. Paul Snaith. His name was John Adams
Race, and he was an electrical engineer, employed

12



The Resurrection of Father Brown

by Mendoza to fit out the old town with all the new
conveniences. He was a figure far less familiar in
satire and international gossip than that of the
American journalist. Yet, as a matter of fact>
America contains a million men of the moral type
of Race to one of the moral type of Snaith. He
was exceptional in being exceptionally good at his
job, but in every other way he was very simple.
He had begun life as a druggist’s assistant in a
Western village and risen by sheer work and merit ;
but he still regarded his home town as the natural
heart of the habitable world. He had been taught
a very Puritan or purely Evangelical sort of Chris-
tianity from the Family Bible at his mother’s knee ;
and in so far as he had time to have any religion,
that was still his religion. Amid all the dazzling
lights of the latest and even wildest discoveries,
when he was at the very edge and extreme of ex-
periment, working miracles of light and sound like
a god creating new stars and solar systems, he nevea
for a moment doubted that the things “ back home ”
were the best things in the world ; his mother and
the Family Bible and the quiet and quaint morality
of his village. He had as serious and noble a sense
of the sacredness of his mother as if he had been
a frivolous Frenchman. He was quite sure the
Bible religion was really the right thing ; only he
vaguely missed it wherever he went in the modern
world. He could hardly be expected to sympathize

*3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

with the reli^ous externals of Catholic countries ;
and in a dislike of mitres and croziers he sym-
pathized with Mr. Snaith, though not in so cock-
sure a fashion. He had no liking for the public
bowings and scrapings of Mendoza, and certainly
no temptation to the masonic mysticism of the
atheist Alvarez. Perhaps all that semPtropical life
was too coloured for him, shot with Indian red and
Spanish gold. Anyhow, when he said there was
nothing to touch his home town, he was not boast-
ing. He really meant that there was somewhere
something plain and unpretentious and touching,
which he really respected more than anything else
in the world. Such being the mental attitude of
John Adams Race in a South American station,
there had been growing on him for some time a
curious feeling, which contradicted all his prejudices
and for which he could not account. For the truth
was this : that the only thing he had ever met
•m his travels that in the least reminded him of the
old wood-pile and the provincial proprieties and the
Bible on his mother’s knee was (for some inscrutable
reason) the round face and black clumsy umbrella
of Father Brown.

He found himself insensibly watching that
commonplace and even comic black figure as it
went bustling about ; watching it with an almost
morbid fascination ; as if it were a walking riddle
or contradiction. He had found something he could

*4



The Resurrection of Father Brown

not hdp liking in the heart of eveiTthing he hated \
it was as if he had been horribly tormented by
lesser demons and then found that the Devil was
quite an ordinary person.

Thus it happened that, looking out of his win-
dow on that moonlit night, he saw the Devil go by,
the demon of unaccountable blamelessness, in his
broad black hat and long black coat, shuffling along
the street towards the gateway, and saw it with an
interest which he could not himself understand.
He wondered where the priest was going, and what
he was really up to ; and remained gazing out into
the moonlit street long after the little black figiue
had passed. And then he saw something else that
intrigued him further. Two other men whom he
recognized passed across his window as across a
lighted stage. A sort of blue limelight of the moon
ran in a spectral halo round the big bush of hair
that stood erect on the head of little .Eckstein, the
wine-seller, and it outlined a taller and darker
figure with an eagle profile and a queer old-fitshioned
and very top-heavy black hat, which seemed to
make the whole outline still more bizarre, like a
shape in a shadow pantomime. Race rebuked him-
self for allowing the moon to play such tricks
with his fiuicy ; for on. a second glance he recog-
nized fihe black Spanish side-whiskers and high-
featured fiice of Dr. Calderon, a worthy medical
man of the town, whom he had once found attend-

15



The Incredulity of' Father Brown

ing professionally on Mendoza. Still, there was
something in the way the men were whispering to
each other and peering up the street that struck him
as peculiar. On a sudden impulse he leapt over the
low window-sill and himself went bareheaded up
the road, following their trail. He saw them dis-
appear under the dark archway ; and a moment
after there came a dreadful cry from beyond
curiously loud and piercing, and all the more
bloodcurdling to Race because it said something
very distinctly in some tongue that he did not
know.

The next moment there was a rushing of feet,
more cries, and then a confused roar of rage or grief
that shook the turrets and tall palm trees of the
place ; there was a movement in the mob that had
gathered, as if they were sweeping backwards
through the gateway. And then the dark archway
resounded with a new voice, this time intelligible
•to him and falling with the note of doom, as someone
shouted through the gateway :

“ Father Brown is dead 1 ”

He never knew what prop gave way in his
mind, or why something on which he had been
counting suddenly failed him ; but he ran towards
the gateway and was just in time to meet his
countryman, the journalist Snaith, coming out of
the dark entrance, deadly pale and snapping his
fingers nervously.

i6



The Resurrection of Father Brown

“ It’s quite true,” said Snaith, with something
which for him approached to reverence. “ He’s a
goner. The doctor’s been looking at him, and
there’s no hope. Some of these damned Dagos
clubbed him as he came through the gate~God
knows why. It'll be a great loss to the place.”

Race did not or perhaps could not reply, but
ran on under the arch to the scene beyond. The
small black figure lay where it had fallen on the
wilderness of wide stones starred here and there
with green thorn ; and the great crowd was being
kept back, chiefly by the mere gestures of one
gigantic figure in the foreground. For there were
many there who swayed hither and thither at the
mere movement of his hand, as if he had been a
magician.

Alvarez, the dictator and demagogue, was a tall,
swaggering figure, always rather flamboyantly clad,
and on this occasion he wore a green uniform with
embroideries like silver snakes crawling all over it,'
with an order round his neck hung on a very vivid
maroon ribbon. His close curling hair was already
grey, and in contrast his complexion, which his
friends called olive and his foes octoroon, looked
almost literally gulden, as if it were a mask moulded
in gold. Buji^is large-featured face, which was
powerful anB humorous, was at this moment pro-
perly grave and grim. He had been waiting, he
explained, for Father Brown at the cafd, when he

*7



The Incredulity of Father Brown

had heard a rusde and a fall and, conung out, had
found the corpse lying on the flagstones.

“ I know what some of you are thinking," he
said, looking round proudly, “ and if you are afraid
of me, as you are, I will say it for you. I am an
atheist ; I have no god to call on for those who will
not take my word. But I tell you in the name of
every root of honour that may be left to a soldier
and a man, that I had no part in this. If I had the
men here that did it, 1 would rejoice to hang them
on that tree."

“ Naturally we are glad to hear you say so,”
said old Mendoza stiffly and solemnly, standing by
the body of his fallen coadjutor. << This blow has
been too appalling for us to say what else we feel
at present. I suggest that it will be more decent
and proper if wc remove my friend’s body and
break up this irregular meeting. I understand," he
added gravely to the doctor, “ that there is un-
fortunately no doubt."

" There is no doubt," said Dr. Calderon.

John Race went back to his lodgings sad and
with a singular sense of emptiness. It seemed
impossible that he should miss a man whom he
never knew. He learned that the funeral was to
take place next day ; for all felt that the crisis
should be past as quickly as possible, for fear of
riots that were hourly growing more probable.
When Snaith had seen the row of Red Indians

i8



The Resurrection of Father Brown

sitting in the veranda, they might have been a row
of ancient Aztec images carved in red wood. But
he had not seen them as they were when they heard
that the priest was dead.

Indeed they would certainly have risen in
revolution and lynched the republican leader, if
they had not been immediately blocked by the
direct necessity of behaving respectfully to the coffin
of their own religious leader. The actual assassins,
whom it would have been most natural to lynch,
seemed to have vanished into thin air. Nobody
knew their names ; and nobody would ever know
whether the dying man had even seen their faces.
That strange look of surprise that was apparently
his last look on earth might have been the recog-
nition of their faces. Alvarez repeated violently
that it was no work of his, and attended the funeral,
walking behind the coffin in his splendid silver and
green uniform with a sort of bravado Qf reverence.

Behind the veranda a flight of stone steps
scaled a very steep green bank, fenced by a cactus-
hedge ; and up this the co&n was laboriously
lifted to the ground above, Aid placed temporarily
at the foot of the great gaimt crucifix that dominated
the road and guarded the consecrated ground.
Below in the road were great seas of people lament-
ing and telling their beads ; an orphan population
that had lost a father. Despite all these symbols
that were provocative enough to him, Alvarez

*9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

behaved with restraint and respect ; and all would
have gone well, as Race told himself, had the others
only let him alone.

Race told himself bitterly that old Mendoza
had always looked like an old fool and had now
very conspicuously and completely behaved like an
old fool. By a custom' common in simpler societies,
the coffin was left open and the face uncovered,
bringing the pathos to the point of agony for all
those simple people. This, being consonant to
tradition, need have done no harm ; but some
officious person had added to it the custom of the
French free-thinkers, of having speeches by the
graveside. Mendoza proceeded to make a speech ;
a rather long speech, and the longer it was the lower
and lower sank John Race’s spirits and sympathies
with the religious ritual involved. A list of saintly
attributes, apparently of the most antiquated sort,
was rolled out with the dilatory dullness of an
after-dinner speaker who does not know how to sit
down. That was bad enough ; but Mendoza had
also the ineffable stupidity to start reproaching
and even taunting his political opponents. In three
minutes he had succeeded in making a scene ;
and a very extraordinary scene it was.

** We may well ask,” he said, looking around him
pompously, ” We may well ask where such virtues
can be found among those who have madly aban-
doned the creed of their fathers. It is when we

ao



The Resurrection of Father Brown

have atheists among us, atheist leaders, nay some-
times even atheist rulers, that we find their infamous
philosophy bearing fruit in crimes like this. If we
ask who murdered this holy man, we shall assiuedly
find ”

Africa of the forests looked out of the eyes of
Alvarez the hybrid adventurer ; and Race fancied
he could see suddenly that the man was after all
a barbarian, who could not control himself to the
end ; one might guess that all his “ illuminated ”
transcendentalism had a touch of Voodoo. Any-
how, Mendoza could not continue, for Alvarez
had sprung up and was shouting back at him and
shouting him down, with infinitely superior lungs.

“ Who murdered him ? ” he roared. “ Your
God murdered him 1 His own God murdered
him I According to you, he murders all his faith-
ful and foolish servants — as he murdered that
one,” and he made a violent gesture, i)Ot towards
the coffin but the crucifix.

Seeming to control himself a little, he went on
in a tone still angry but more argiunentathre :
“ I don’t believe it, but you do. Isn’t it better
to have no God than one that robs you in this
fashion ? I at least am not afraid to say that there
is none. There is no power in all this blind and
brainless universe that can hear your prayer or
return your friend. Though you beg Heaven to
raise him, he will not rise. Though I dare Heaven

ai



The Incredulity of Father Brown

to raise him, he will not rise. Here and now I will
put it to the test — I defy the God who is not there
to waken the man who sleeps for ever."

There was a shock of silence, and the dema-
gogue had made his sensation.

“ We might have known," cried Mendoza in
a thick gobbling voice, " when we allowed such
men as you "

A new voice cut into his speech ; a high and
shrill voice with a Yankee accent.

“ Stop I Stop I " cried Snaith the journalist*
" Something’s up I I swear I saw him move."

He went racing up the steps and rushed to
the coffin, while the mob below swayed with inde-
scribable frenzies. The next moment he had turned
a face of amazement over his shoulder and made
a signal with his finger to Dr. Calderon, who
hastened forward to confer with him. When the
two men stepped away again from the coffin, all
could see that the position of the head had altered.
A roar of excitement rose from the crowd and seemed
to stop suddenly, as if cut off in mid-air ; for the
priest in the co^ gave a groan and raised himself
on one elbow, looking with bleared and blinking
eyes at the crowd.

John Adams Race, who had hitherto known
only miracles of science, never found himself able in
after years to describe the topsy-turvydom of the
next few days. He seemed to have burst out of the



The Resurrection of Father Brown

world of time and space, and to be living in the
impossible. In half an hour the whole of that
town and district had been transformed into some-
thing never known for a thousand years; a medueval
people turned to a mob of monks by a staggering
miracle ; a Greek city where the god had descended
among men. Thousands prostrated themselves
in the road ; hundreds took vows on the spot ; and
even the outsiders, like the two Americans, were
able to think and speak of nothing but the prodigy.
Alvarez himself was shaken, as well he might be *,
and sat down, with his head upon his hands.

And in the midst of all this tornado of beatitude
was a little man struggling to be heard. His
voice was small and faint, and the noise was deafen-
ing. He made weak little gestures that seemed
more those of irritation than anything else. He
came to the edge of the parapet above the crowd,
waving it to be quiet, with movements .rather like
the flap of the short wings of a penguin. There
was something a little more like a lull in the noise ;
^and then Father Brown for the first time reached
the utmost stretch of the indignation that he could
launch against his children.

** Oh, you silly people," he said in a high and
qtiavering voice, " Oh, you silly, silly people.”

Then he suddenly seemed to pull himself to-
gether, nuuie a bolt for the steps with his more
normal gait, and began hurriedly to descend.

33



The Incredulity of Father Brown

** Where are you going, Father ? ” said Men-
doza with more than his usual veneration.

“ To the telegraph office,” said Father Brown
hastily. “ What ? No, of course it’s not a miracle.
Why should there be a miracle ? Miracles are
not so cheap as all that.”

And he came tumbling down the steps, the
people flinging themselves before him to implore
his blessing.

“ Bless you, bless you,” said Father Brown
hastily. ” C^d bless you all and give you more
sense.”

And he scuttled away with extraordinary rapidity
to the telegraph office, where he wired to his Bishop’s
secretary, “ There is some mad story about a miracle
here ; hope his lordship not give authority. Nothing
in it.”

As he turned away from this effort, he tottered
a little with the reaction, and John Race caught him
by the arm.

” Let me see you home,” he said; ” you deserve
more than these people are giving you.”

John Race and the priest were seated in the
presbytery ; the table was still piled up with the
papers with which the latter had been wrestling
the day before ; the bottle of wine and the
emptied wine-glass still stood where he had left
them.


*4



The Resurrectioft of Father Brovin

'* And now,” said Father Brown almost g^rimly,
** I can begin to think.”

“ I shouldn’t think too hard just yet,” said the
American. ” You must be wanting a rest. Besides,
what are you going to think about ? ”

” I have pretty often had the task of investigating
murders, as it happens,” said Father Brown. “ Now
I have got to investigate my own murder.”

“ If 1 were you,” said Race, “ I should take a
little wine first.”

Father Brown stood up and filled himself
another glass, lifted it, looked thoughtfully into
vacancy and put it down again. Then he sat down
once more and said :

” Do you know what I felt like when I died ?
You may not believe it, but my feeling was one of
overwhelming astonishment.”

” Well,” answered Race, ” I suppose you were
astonished at being knocked on the head.”

Father Brown leaned over to him and said ia
a low voice :

” I was astonished at not being knocked on
the head.”

Race looked at him for a moment as if he thought
the knock on the head had been only too efiPective ;
but he only said ; ” What do you mean ? ”

“ I mean that when that num brought his
bludgeon down with a great swipe, it stopped at
my head and ^id not even touch it. In the same



T^. Incredulity of Father Brown

way the other felloir made as if to strike me with
a ^ife, but he never gave me a scratch. It was
just like play-acting. I think it was. But then
followed die extraordinary thing.”

He looked thoughtfully at the papers on the
table for a moment and then went on :

“ Though I had not even been touched with
knife or stick, 1 began to feel my legs doubling up
under me and my very life failing. I knew I was
being struck down by something, but it was not
by those weapons. Do you know what I think it
was ? ”

And he pointed to the wine on the table.

Race picked up the wine-glass and looked at it
and smelt it.

'* I think you are right,” he said. ” I began as
a druggist and studied chemistry. I couldn't say
for certain without an analysis, but I think there's
something very unusual in this stuff. There are
drugs by which the Asiatics produce a temporary
sleep that looks like death.”

“ Quite so,” said the priest calmly. " The
whole of this miracle was faked, for some reason or
other. That funeral scene was staged— and timed.
I think it is part of that raving madness of publicity
that has got hold of Snaith ; but I can hardly believe
he wotild go quite so far, merely for that. After all,
it's one thing to make copy out of me and run me

as a sort of sham Sherlock Holmes, and ”

a6



The Resurrection of Father Broum

Even as the priest spoke his face altered. His
blinking eyelids shut suddenly and he stood up
as if he were choking. Then he put one wavering
hand as if groping his way towards the door.

“ Where are you going ? " asked the other in
some wonder.

“ If you ask me," said Father Brown, who was
quite white, “ I was going to pray. Or rather,
to praise.”

" I’m not sure I understand. What is the matter
with you ? ”

" I was going to praise God for having so
strangely and so incredibly saved me— eaved me
by an inch."

" Of course," said Race, " I am not of your
religion ; but believe me, I have religion enough to
understand that. Of course you would thank God
for saving you from death."

" No," said the priest. " Not, from death.
From disgrace.”

The other sat staring ; and the priest’s next
words broke out of him with a sort of cry.

" And if it had only been my disgrace I But it
was the disgrace of all I stand for ; the disgrace of
the Faith that they went about to encompass.
What it might have been I The moat huge
and horrible scandal ever launched against us
since the last lie was choked in the throat of Titus
Oates."


*7



The Incredulity of Father Brown

" What on earth are you talking about ? *’
demanded his companion.

“ Well, I had better tell you at once,” said the
priest ; and sitting down, he went on more com-
posedly : ” It came to me in a flash when I happened
to mention Snaith and Sherlock Holmes. Now I
happen to remember what I wrote about his absurd
scheme ; it was the natural thing to write, and yet
I think they had ingeniously manoeuvred me into
writing just those words. They were something
like * I am ready to die and come to life again like
Sherlock Holmes, if that is the best way.’ And
the moment I thought of that, I realized that I had
been made to write all sorts of things of that kind,
all pointing to the same idea. I wrote, as if to an
accomplice, saying that I would drink the drugged
wine at a particular time. Now, don’t you see ? ”

Race sprang to his feet still staring : ” Yes,”
he said, “ I think I begin to see.”

“ They would have boomed the miracle. Then
they would have bust up the miracle. And what is
the worst, they would have proved that 7 was in the
conspiracy. It would have been our sham miracle.
That’s all there is to it ; and about as near hell as you
and I will ever be, I hope.”

Then he said after a pause, in quite a mild
voice :

“ They certainly would have got quite a lot
of good copy out of me.”

a8



The Resurrection of Father Brown

Race looked at the table and said darkly : ** How
many of these brutes were in it ? ”

Father Brown shook his head. “ More than
I like to think of,” he said; “ but 1 hope some of
them were only tools. Alvarez might think that
all’s fair in war, perhaps ; he has a queer mind.
I’m very much afraid that Mendoza is an old
hypocrite ; I never trusted him and he hated my
action in an industrial matter. But all that will
wait ; I have only got to thank God for the escape.
And especially that I wired at once to the
Bishop.”

John Race appeared to be very thoughtful.

” You’ve told me a lot I didn’t know,” he said
at last, ” and I feel inclined to tell you the only thing
you don’t know. I can imagine how those fellows
calculated well enough. They thought any man
alive, waking up in a coffin to find himself canonized
like a saint, and made into a walking miracle for
everyone to admire, would be swept along with his
worshippers and accept the crown of glory that fell
on him out of the sky. And I reckon their calcu-
lation was pretty practical psychology, as men go.
I’ve seen all sorts of men in all sorts of places ;
and I tell you frankly I don’t believe there’s one man
m a thousand who could wake up like that with
all his wits about him ; and while he was still
almost talking in his sleep, would have the sanity
and the simplicity and the humility to——” He

*9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

was much surprised to find himself moved, and his
level voice wavering.

Father Brown was gazing abstractedly, and in
a rather cock-eyed fashion, at the bottle on the table.
“ Look here,’* he said, “ what about a bottle of real
wine ? ”



II

THE ARROW OF HEAVEN

It is to be feared that about a hundred detective
stories have begun with the discovery that an
American millionaire has been murdered; an event
which is, for some reason, treated as a sort of
calamity. This story, I am happy to say, has to
begin with a murdered millionaire; in one sense,
indeed, it has to begin with three murdered million-
aires, which some may regard as an emharras dt
richesse. But it was chiefly this coincidence or
continuity of criminal policy that took the whole
affair out of the ordinary run of criminal cases and
made it the extraordinary problem that it was.

It was very generally said that they had all
fallen victims to some vendetta or curse attaching to
the possession of a relic of great value both intrinsic-
ally and historically; a sort of chalice inlaid with
preciom stones and commonly called the Coptic Cup.
Its origin was obscure, but its use was conjectiured to
be religious; and some attributed the fate that fol-
lowed its possessors to the fonaticism of some
Oriental Christian horrified at its passing through
such materialistic hands. But the mysterious slayer,

3 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

whether or no he was such a fanatic, was already a
figure of lurid and sensational interest in the world
of journalism and gossip. The nameless being was
provided with a name, or a nickname. But it is only
with the story of the third victim that we are now
concerned; for it was only in his case that a certain
Father Brown, who is the subject of these sketches,
had an opportunity of making his presence felt.

When Father Brown first stepped off an Atlantic
liner on to American soil he discovered, as many
another Englishman has done, that he was a much
more important person than he had ever supposed.
His short figure, his short-sighted and undistin-
guished countenance, his rather rusty black clerical
clothes, could pass through any crowd in his own
country without being noticed as anything unusual,
except perhaps unusually insignificant. But America
has a genius for the encouragement of fame; and his
appearance in one or two curious criminal problems,
together with his long association with Flambeau,
the ex-criminal and detective, had consolidated a
reputation in America out of what was little more
than a rumour in England. His round face was
blank with surprise when he found himself held up
on the quay by a group of journalists, as by a gang of
brigands, who asked him questions about all the
subjects on which he was least likely to regard him-
self as an authority, such as the details of female dress
and the criminal statistics of the country that he had

3a



The Arrow of Heaven

only that moment clapped his eyes on. Perhaps it
was the contrast with the black embattled solidarity
of this group that made more vivid another figure
that stood apart from it) equally black against the
burning white daylight of that brilliant place and
season, but entirely solitary: a tall, rather yellow-
faced man in great goggles, who arrested him with a
gesture when the journalists had finished and sud:
“ Excuse me, but maybe you are looking for Giptun
Wain."

Some apology may be made for Father Brown;
for he himself would have been sincerely apologetic.
It must be remembered that he had never seen
America before, and more especially that he had
never seen that sort of tortoise-shell spectacles be-
fore; for the fashion at this time had not spread to
England. His first sensation was that of gazing at
some goggling sea-monster with a faint suggestion
of a diver’s helmet. Otherwise the man was ex-
quisitely dressed; and to Brown, in his innocence,
the spectacles seemed the queerest disfigurement for
a dandy. It was as if a dandy had adorned himself
with a wooden leg as an extra touch of elegsuice. The
question also embarrassed him. An American
aviator of the name of Wain, a friend of some friends
of his own in France, wras indeed one of a long Kst of
people he had some hope of seeing during his
American visit; but he had never expected to hear of.
him 80 soon.


33



The Incredulity of Father Brown

'* I beg your pardon," he said doubtfully, *' are
you Captain Wain ? Do you — do you know him ? ”
" Well, I’m pretty confident I’m not Captain
Wain," said the man in goggles, with a face of wood.
" I was pretty clear about that when I saw him wait-
ing for you over there in the car. But the other
question’s a bit more problematical. I reckon I
Imow Wain and his uncle, and old man Merton too.
I know old man Merton, but old man Merton don’t
know me. And he thinks he has the advantage, and
I think I have the advantage. See ? ’’

Father Brown did not quite see. He blinked at
the glittering seascape and the pinnacles of the city,
and then at the man in goggles. It was not only the
masking of the man’s eyes that produced the im.
pression of something impenetrable. Something in
his yellow face was almost Asiatic, even Chinese ; and
his conversation seemed to consist of stratified layers
of irony. He was a type to be found here and there
in that hearty and sociable population; he was the
inscrutable American.

My name’s Drage," he said, " Norman
Drage, and I’m an American citizen, which explains
everything. At least I imagine your friend Wain
woidd like to explain the rest; so we’ll postpone
The Fourth of July till another date."

Father Brown was dragged in a somewhat dazed
condition towards a car at some little distance, in
which a young man with tufts of untidy yellow hur



The Arrow of Heaven

and a rather harassed and haggard expression, hailed
him from afar and presented hinuelf as Peter Wain.
Before he knew where he was he was stowed in the
car and travelling with considerable speed through
and beyond the city. He was unused to the im-
petuous practicality of such American action, and
felt about as bewildered as if a chariot drawn by
dragons had carried him away into fairyland. It was
under these disconcerting conditions that he heard
for the first time, in long monologues from Wain,
and short sentences from Drage, the story of the
Coptic Cup and the two crimes already connected
with it.

It seemed that Wain had an uncle named Crake
who had a partner named Merton, who was number
three in the series of rich business men to whom the
cup had belonged. The first of them, Titus P.
Trant, the Copper King, had received threatening
letters from somebody signing himself Daniel Doom.
The name was presumably a pseudonym, but it had
come to stand for a very public if not a very popular
character; for somebody as well known as Robin
Hood and Jack the Ripper combined. For it soon
became clear that the writer of the threatening letter
did not confine himself to threatening. Anyhow,
the upshot was that old Trant was found one morn-
ing with his head in his own lily-pond, and there was
not the shadow of a clue. The cup was, fortunately,
safe in the bank; and it passed with the rest of Trant’s

35



The Incredulity of Father Brown

property to his cousin, Brian Horder, who was also a
man of great wealth and who was also threatened by
the nameless enemy. Brian Horder was picked up
d«id at the foot of a cliff outside his seaside residence,
at which there was a burglary, this time on a large
scale. For though the cup apparently again escaped,
enough bonds and securities were stolen to leave
Horder*s financial affairs in confusion.

“ Brian Horder’s widow,” explained Wain,
“ had to sell most of his valuables, i believe, and
Brander Merton must have purchased the cup at
that time, for he had it when I first knew him. But
you can guess for yourself that it’s not a very com-
fortable thing to have.”

” Has Mr. Merton ever had any of the threaten-
ing letters f ” asked Father Brown, after a pause.

“ I imagine he has,” said Mr. Drage; and some-
thing in his voice made the priest look at him curi-
ously, until he realized that the man in goggles was
laughing silently, in a fashion that gave the new-
comer something of a chill.

” I’m pretty sure he has,” said Peter Wain,
frowning. ” I’ve not seen the letters ; only his secre-
tary sees any of his letters, for he is pretty reticent
about business matters, as big business men have to
be. But I’ve seen him real upset and annoyed with
letters; and letters that he tore up, too, before even
his secretary saw them. The secretary himself is
getting nervous and says he is sure somebody is

36



The Arrow of Heaven

laying for the old man ; and the long and the short of
•it is, that we'd be very grateful for a little advice in
the matter. Everybody knows your great reputation,
Father Brown, and the secretary asked me to see if
you’d mind coming straight out to the Merton house
at once.”

“ Oh, I see,” said Father Brown, on whom the
meaning of this apparent kidnapping began to dawn
at last. ” But really I don't see that I can do any
more than you can. You’re on the spot and must
have a hundred times more data for a scientific con-
clusion than a chance visitor.”

” Yes,” said Mr. Drage dryly, ‘‘ oiu" conclusions
are much too scientific to be true. I reckon if any-
thing hit a man like Titus P. Trant, it just came out
of the sky without waiting for any scientific explana-
tion. What they call a bolt from the blue.”

” You can’t possibly mean,” cried Wain, ” that
’ it was supernatural ! "

But it was by no means easy at any time to dis-
cover what Mr. Drage could possibly mean; except
that if he said somebody was a real smart man, he
very probably meant he was a fool. Mr. Drage
maintained an Oriental immobility until the car
stopped, a little while after, at what was obviously
their destination. It was rather a singular {dace.
They had been driving through a thinly-wooded
country that o{)ened into a wide plain, and jtiat in
front ci them was a building consisting of a single

37



The Incredulity of Father Brown

wall or very high fence, round like a Roman camp
and having rather the appearance of an aerodrome.
The barrier did not look like wood or stone, and
closer inspection proved it to be of metal.

They all alighted from the car, and one small
door in the wall was slid open with considerable
caution, dfter manipulations resembling the opening
of a safe. But, much to Father Brown’s surprise,
the man called Norman Drage showed no disposition
to enter, but took leave of them with sinister gaiety.

“ I won’t come in,” he said. “ It ’ud be too
much pleasurable excitement for old man Merton, I
reckon. He loves the sight of me so much that he’d
die of joy.”

And he strode away, while Father Brown, with
increasing wonder, was admitted through the steel
door which instantly clicked behind him. Inside
was a large and elaborate garden of gay and varied
colours, but entirely without 'any trees or tall shrubs
or flowers. In the centre of it rose a house of hand-
some and even striking architecture, but so high and
narrow as rather to resemble a tower. The burning
sunlight gleamed on glass roofing here and there at
the top, but there seemed to be no windows at all in
the lower part of it. Over everything was that
spotless and sparkling cleanliness that seemed so
native to the clear American air. When they came
inside the portal, they stood amid resplendent marble
and metals and enamels of brilliant odours, but there

38



The Arrow of Heaven

was no staircase. Nothing but a single shaft for a
'^lift went up the centre between the solid walls, and
the approach to it was guarded by heavy, powerful
men like plain<<lothes policemen.

“ Pretty elaborate protection, I know," said
Wain. " Maybe it makes you smile a little. Father
Brown, to find Merton has to live in a fortress like
this without even a tree in the garden for anyone to
hide behind. But you don’t know what sort of
proposition we’re up against in this coimtry. And
perhaps you don’t know just what the name of
Brander Merton means. He’s a quiet-looking man
enough, and anybody might pass him in the street;
not that they get much chance nowadays, for he can
only go out now and then in a closed car. But if
anything happened to Brander Merton there’d be
earthquakes from Alaska to the Cannibal Islands. I
fancy there was. never a king or emperor who had
such power over the nations as he has. After all, I
suppose if you’d been asked to visit the dzar or the
King of England you’d have had the curiosity to go.
You mayn’t care much for czars or millionaires; but
it just means that power like that is always interest-
ing. And I hope it’s not against your principles to
visit a modern sort of emperor like Merton."

“ Not at all," said Father Brown, quietly. " It
is my duty to visit prisoners and all miserable men in
captivity."

There was a silence, and the young man frowned
39



The Incredulity of Father Brown

with a strange and almost shifity look on his lean £sce.
Then he said, abruptly:

“Well, you’ve got to remember it isn’t only
common crooks or the Black Hand that’s against
him. This Daniel Doom is pretty much like the
Devil. Look how he dropped Trant in his own
gardens and Horder outside his house, and got
away with it.’’

The top floor of the mansion, inside the enor-
mously thick walls, consisted of two rooms; an outer
room which they entered, and an inner room that
was the great millionaire’s sanctum. They entered
the outer room just as two other visitors were coming
out of the inner one. One was hailed by Peter Wain
as his uncle — a small but very stalwart and active
man with a shaven head that looked bald and a
brown face that looked almost too brown to have
ever been white. This was old Crake, commonly
called Hickory Crake in reminiscence of the more
famous Old Hickory, because of his fame in the last
Red Indian wars. His companion was a singular
contrast— a very dapper gentleman with dark hair
like a black varnish and a broad, black ribbon to his
monocle: Barnard Blake, who was old Merton’s
lawyer and had been discussing with the partners the
business of the firm. The four men met in the middle
of the outer room and paused for a little polite con-
versation, in the act of respectively going and coming
And through all goings and comings another figure

40



The Arrow of Heaven

sat at the back of the room near the inner door,
massive and motionless in the half-light from the
inner window; a man with a negro hot and enormous
shoulders. This was what the humorous self-
criticism of America playfully calls the Bad Man;
whom his friends might call a bodyguard and his
enemies a bravo.

This man never moved or stirred to greet any-
body; but the sight of him in the outer room seemed
to move Peter Wain to his first nervous query.

** Is anybody with the chief ? he asked.

“ Don’t get rattled, Peter,” chuckled his uncle.
“ Wilton the secretary is with him, and I hope that’s
enough for anybody. I don’t believe Wilton ever
sleeps for watching Merton. He is better than
twenty bodyguards. And he’s quick and quiet as an
Indian.”

“ Well, you ought to know,” said his nephew,
laughing. ” I remember the Red Indian tricks you
used to teach me when I was a boy and liked to read
Red Indian stories. But in my Red Indian stories
Red Indians seemed always to ^ve the worst of it.”

” They didn’t in real life,” said the old frontiers-
man grimly.

“ Indeed ? ” inquired the bland Mr. Blake. ” I
should have thought they could do very little against
our firearms.”

” I’ve seen an Indian stand under a hundred guns
with nothing but a little scalping knife and IdH a



The Incredulity of Father Brown

white man standing at my side on the top of a fort,"
said Crake.

Why, what did he do with it ? " asked the other.

" Threw it," replied Crake, " threw it in a flash
before a shot could be fired. I don't know where he
'earnt the trick."

"Well, I hope you didn't learn it," said his
nephew, laughing.

" It seems to me,” said Father Brown, thought-
fully, " that the story might have a moral."

While they were speaking Mr. Wilton, the
secretary, had come out of the inner room and stood
waiting; a pale, fair-haired man with a square chin
and steady eyes with a look like a dog's; it was not
difficult to believe that he had the single eye of a
watchdog.

He only said, " Mr. Merton can see you in about
ten minutes," but it served for a signal to break up
the gossiping group. Old Crake said he must be
offf and his nephew went out with him and his legal
companion, leaving Father Brown for the moment
alone widi his secretary; for the negroid giant at the
other end of the room could hardly be felt as if he
were human or alive; he sat so motionless with his
broad back to them, staring towards the inner room.

" Arrangements rather elaborate here. I'm
afraid," said the secretary. " You've probably heard
all about this Daniel Doom, and why it isn't safe to
leave the boss very much alone."

4 *



The Arrow of Heaven

“ But he is alone just now, isn't he ? ” said
Father Brown.

The secretary looked at him with grave, grey
eyes.

“ For fifteen minutes," he said. “ For fifteen
minutes out of the twenty-four hours. That is all
the real solitude he has; and that he insists on, for.
a pretty remarkable reason."

" And what is the reason ? " inquired the
visitor.

Wilton, the secretary, continued his steady gaze,
but his mouth, that had been merely grave, became
grim.

** The Coptic Cup," he said. “ Perhaps you've
forgotten the Coptic Cup; but he hasn’t forgotten
that or anything else. He doesn’t trust any of us
about the Coptic Cup. It’s locked up somewhere
and somehow in that room so that only he can find it;
and he won’t take it out till we’re all out of the way.
So we have to risk that quarter of an hour while he
sits and worships it; I reckon it’s the only worship-
ping he does. Not that there’s any risk really; for
I’ve turned all this place into a trap I don’t believe
the devil himself could get into— or at any rate, get
out of. If th& infernal Daniel Doom pays us a visit,
he'll stay to dinner and a good bit later, by God. 1
sit here on hot bricks for the fifteen minutes, and the
instant I heard a shot or a sound of struggle I'd press
this button and an electrocuting current would run

43



The Incredulity of Father Brown

in a ring round that garden wall, so that it ’ud be
death to cross or climb it. Of course there couldn’t
be a shot, for this is the only way in; and the only
window he sits at is away up on the top of a tower as
smooth as a greasy pole. But, anyhow, we’re all
armed here, of course; and if Doom did get into that
room he’d be dead before he got out.”

Father Brown was blinking at the carpet in a
brown study. Then he said suddenly, with some-
thing like a jerk :

” I hope you won’t mind my mentioning it; but
a kind of a notion came into my head just this
minute. It’s about you.”

*' Indeed,” remarked Wilton, ” and what about
me?”

” I think you are a man of one idea,” said Father
Brown, ” and you will forgive me for saying that it
seems to be even more the idea of catching Daniel
Doom than of defending Brander Merton.”

Wilton started a little and continued to stare at
his companion; then very slowly his grim mouth
took on a rather curious smile.

“ How did you — what makes you think that ? ”
he asked.

“ You said that if you heard a shot you
could instantly electrocute the escaping enemy,”
remarked the priest. ” I suppose it occurred to you
that the shot might be Bital to your employer before
the shock was &tal to his foe. I don’t mean that

44



The Arrow of Heaven

you wouldn’t protect Mr. Merton if ]^>u could,
but it seems to come rather second in your thoughts.
The arrangements are very elaborate, as you say, and
you seem to have elaborated them. But they seem
even more designed to catch a murderer than to save
a man."

" Father Brown," said the secretary, who had
recovered his quiet tone, " you’re very smart, but
there’s something more to you than smartness.
Somehow you’re the sort of man to whom one wants
to tell the truth; and besides, you’ll probably hear it,
anyhow, for in one way it’s a joke against me already.
They all say I’m a monomaniac about running down
this big crook, and perhaps I am. But I’ll tell you
one thing that none of them know. My full name is
John Wilton Horder." Father Brown nodded as if he
were completely enlightened, but the other went on.

" This fellow who calls himself Doom killed my
father and uncle and ruined my mother. When
Merton wanted a secretary 1 took the job, because I
thought that where the cup was the criminal might
sooner or later be. But I didn’t know who the
criminal was and could only wait for him; and I
meant to serve Merton faithfully."

“ I understand," said Father Brown gently :
** and, by the way, isn’t it time that we attended on
him ? ’’

" Why, yes," answered Wilton, again starting a
litde out of his brooding, so tlmt the priest concluded

45



The Incredulity of Father Brown

dut his vindictive mania had again absorbed him for
a moment. " Go in now by all means.**

Father Brown walked straight into the inner
room. No sound of greetings followed, but only
a dead silence; and a moment after the priest
reappeared in the doorway.

At the same moment the silent bodyguard sitting
near the door moved suddenly; and it was as if a huge
piece of furniture had come to life. It seemed as
though something in the very attitude of the priest
had been a signal ; for his head was against the light
ftom the inner window and his face was in shadow.

'* I suppose you will press that button,** he said,
with a sort of sigh.

Wilton seemed to awake from his savage brood-
ing with a bound and leapt up with a catch in his
voice.

“ There was no shot,’* he cried.

“ Well,** said Father Brown, “ it depends what
you mean by a shot.”

Wilton rushed forward, and they plunged into
the inner room together. It was a comparatively
smdl room and simply though elegandy fornished.
Oi^site to them one vdde window stood open, over-
looking the garden and the wooded plain. Close up
against the window stood a chair and a small table,
as if the captive desired as much air and light as was
allowed him during his brief luxury of loneliness.

On the litde table under the window stood the
46



The Arrow of Heaoen

Coptic Cup; its owner had evidentl^r been looking at
it in the best light. It was well worth looking at, for
that white and brilliant daylight turned its precious
stones to many-coloured flames so that it might have
been a model of the Holy Grail. It was wdl worth
looking at; but Brander Merton was not looking at
it For his head had follen back over his chair, his
mane of white hair hanging towards the floor, and his
spike of grizzled beard thrust up towards the ceiling,
and out of his throat stood a long, brown-painted
arrow with red feathers at the other end.

“ A silent shot,” said Father Brown, in a low
voice; “ I was just wondering about those new
inventions for silencing firearms. But this is a
very old invention, and quite as silent.”

Then, after a moment, he added: ” I’m afraid he
is dead. What are you going to do ? ”

The pale secretary roused himself with abrupt
resolution. “I’m going to press that. button, of
course,” he said, “ and if that doesn’t do for Daniel
Doom, I’m going to hunt him through the world till
I find him.”

“ Take care it doesn’t do for any of our friends,”
observed Father Brown; “ they can hardly be
oflF; we’d better call them.”

“ That lot know all about the wall,” answered
Wilton. “ None of them will try to climb it, unless
one of them ...» in a great hurry.”

Father Brown went to the window by which the
47



The Incredulity of Father Brown

arrow had evidently entered and looked out. The
garden with its flat flower-beds lay flu: below like a
delicately coloured map of the world. The whole
vista seemed so vast and empty, the tower seemed set
so far up in the sky that as he stared out a strange
phrase came back to his memory.

“ A bolt from the blue,” he said. “ What was
that somebody said about a bolt from the blue and
death coming out of the sky ? Look how far away
everything looks; it seems extraordinary that an
arrow could come so fkr, unless it were an arrow
from heaven.”

Wilton had returned, but did not reply, and the
priest went on as in soliloquy.

” One thinks of aviation. We must ask young
Wain . . . about aviation.”

” There’s a lot of it round here,” said the
secretary.

“ Case of very old or very new weapons,”
observed Father Brown. “ Some would be quite
familiar to his old uncle, I suppose; we must ask
him about arrows. This looks rather like a Red
Indian arrow. 1 don’t know where the Red Indian
shot it from; but you remember the story the old
man told. I said it had a moral.”

“ If it had a moral,” said Wilton warmly, “ it
was only that a real Red Indian might shoot a thing
fluther than you’d iiuicy. It’s nonsense your sug-
gesting a parallel.”


48



The Arrow of Heaven

“ I don’t think you've got the moral quite right,"
said Father Brown.

Although the little priest appeared to melt into
the millions of New York next day, without any
apparent attempt to be anything but a number in a
numbered street, he was, in fact, unobtrusively busy
for the next fortnight with the commission that had
been given him, for he was filled with profound fear
about a possible miscarriage of justice. Without
having any particular air of singling them out from
his other new acquaintances, he found it easy to fall
into talk with the two or three men recently involved
in the mystery; and with old Hickory Crake especi-
ally he had a curious and interesting conversation.
It took place on a seat in Central Park, where the
veteran sat with his bony hands and hatchet face
resting on the oddly-shaped head of a walking stick
of dark red wood, possibly modelled on a tomahawk.

Well, it may be a long shot," he said, wagging
his head, " but I wouldn't advise you to be too
positive about how far an Indian arrow could go.
I’ve known some bow-shots that seemed to go
straighter than any bullets, and hit the mark to
amazement, considering how long they had been
travelling. Of course, you practically never hear
now of a Red Indian with a bow and arrows, still less
of a Red Indian hanging about here. But if by any
chance there were one of the old Indian marksmen,
with one of the old Indian bows, hiding in those trees

49



Th€ Incredulity of Father Brown

hundreds of yards beyond the Merton outer wall-
why, then, I wouldn’t put it past the noble savage to
be able to send an arrow over the wall and into the
top window of Merton’s house, no, nor into Merton,
ei^er. I’ve seen things quite as wonderful as that
done in the old days.”

” No doubt,” said the priest, “ you have done
things quite as wonderful as well as seen them.”

Old Crake chuckled, and then said gruffly,
” Oh, that’s all ancient history.”

” Some people have a way of studying ancient
history,” the priest said. ” I suppose we may take
it there is nothing in your old record to make people
talk unpleasantly about this affair.”

“What do you mean ? ” demanded Crake, his eyes
shifting sharply for the first time in his red, wooden
face, that was rather like the head of a tomahawk.

“ Well, since you were so well acquainted with
all the arts and crafts of the Redskin,” began Father
Brown slowly.

Crake had had a hunched and almost shrunken
appearance as he sat with his chin propped on its
queer-shaped crutch. But the next instant he stood
erect in the path like a fighting bravo with the crutch
clutched like a cudgel.

“ What ? ” he cried, in something like a raucous
screech. “ What the hell 1 Are you standing up to
me to tdl me I might happen to have murdered my
own brother-in-law ? ”

so



The Arrow of Heaoen

From a dozen seats dotted about the path people
looked towards the disputants as they stood fiicing
each other in the middle of the path, t^ bald-headed
energetic little man brandishing his outlandish stick
like a club, and the black, dumpy figure of the little
cleric looking at him without moving a muscle, save
for his blinking eyelids. For a moment it looked as
if the dumpy black fig^ure would be knocked on the
head, and laid out with true Red Indian promptitude
and despatch; and the large form of an Irish po^ce-
man could be seen heaving up in the distance, and
bearing down on the group. But the priest only said,
quite placidly, like one answering an ordinary query:

** I have formed certain conclusions about it, but
I do not think I will mention them till I make my
report.”

Whether imder the infiuence of the footsteps of
the policeman or of the eyes of the priest, old
Hickory tucked his stick under his arm and put his
hat on again, grunting. The priest bade him a
placid good morning, and pass^ in an unhurried
^hion out of the park, making his way to the lounge
of the hotel where he knew that young Wain was to
be found. The young nun sprang up with a greet-
ing; he looked even more haggard and haratsed
than before, as if some worry were eating him away;
and the priest had a suspicion that his young friend
had recently been engaged, with only too conspicu-
ous success, in evading the last Amendment to the



The Incredulity of Father Brown

American Constitution. But at the first word about
his hobby or favourite science, he was vigilant and
concentrated enough. For Father Brown had asked,
in an idle and conversational fashion, whether much
flying was done in that district, and had told how he
had at first mistaken Mr. Merton’s circular wall for
an aerodrome.

“ It’s a wonder you didn’t see any while we were
there,” answered Captain Wain. ” Sometimes
they’re as thick as flies; that open plain is a great
place for them, and I shouldn’t wonder if it were the
chief breeding-ground, so to speak, for my sort of
birds in the future. I’ve flown a good deal there
myself, of course, and I know most of the fellows
about here who flew in the war; but there are a
whole lot of people taking to it out there now,
whom I never heard of in my life. I suppose it will
be like motoring soon, and every man in the States
win have one.”

“ Being endowed by his Creator,” said Father
Brown with a smile, ” with the right to life, liberty
and the pursuit of motoring — ^not to mention
aviation. So I suppose we may take it that one
strange aeroplane passing over that house, at certain
times, wouldn’t be noticed much.”

” No,” replied the young man, “ I don’t suppose
it would.”

'* Or even if the man were known,” went on the
other, ” I suppose he might get hold of a machine



The Arrow of Heaven

that wouldn't be recognized as his. If joUf for
instance, flew in the ordinary way, Mr. Merton and
his friends might recognize the rig-out, perhaps;
but you might pass pretty near that window on a
different pattern of plane, or whatever you call it;
near enough for practical purposes.”

” Well, yes,” began the young man, almost auto-
matically, and then ceased, and remained staring at
the cleric with an open mouth and eyes standing out
of his head.

“ My God 1 ” he said, in a low voice, “ my God 1”

Then he rose from the lounge seat, pale and
shaking from head to foot, and still staring at the
priest.

“ Are you mad ? ” he said ; “ are you raving
mad ? ”

There was a silence and then he spoke again in
a swift, hissing fashion. “ You positively come here
to suggest*——”

” No, only to collect suggestions,” said Father
Brown, rising. ” I may have formed some con-
clusions provisionally, but I had better reserve them
for the present.”

And saluting the other with the same stiff
civility, he passed out of the hotel to continue his
curious peregrinations.

By the dusk of that day they had led him down
the dingy streets and steps that straggled and
tumbled towards the river in the oldest and n««st

53



The Incredulity of Father Brown

irregular part of the city. Immediately under the
coloured lantern that marked the entrance to a
rather low Chinese restaurant, he encoimtered a
figiire he had seen before, though by no means
presenting itself to the eye as he had seen it.

Mr. Norman Drage still confronted the world
grimly behind his great goggles which seemed some-
how to cover his &ce like a dark mask of glass. But
except for the goggles, his appearance had under-
gone a strange transformation in the month that had
elapsed since the murder. He had then, as Father
Brown had noted, been dressed up to the nines; up
to that point, indeed, where there begins to be too
fine a distinction between the dandy and the dtunmy
outside a tailor’s shop. But now all those externals
were mysteriously altered for the worse; as if the
tailor’s dummy had been turned into a scarecrow.
His top hat still existed, but it was battered and
shabby, his clothes were dilapidated; his watch-
chain and minor ornaments were gone. Father
Brown, however, addressed him as if they had met
yesterday, and made no demur to sitting down with
him on a bench in the cheap eating-house whither he
was bound. It was not he, however, who began the
conversation.

“ Well ? ” growled Drage, ** and have you suc-
ceeded in avenging your holy and sainted million-
aire ? We know dl millionaires are holy and
sainted; you can find it all in the papers next day,

54



The Arrow of Heaven

about how they lived by the light of the Family Bible
they read at their mother’s knee. Geel if they’d
only read out some of the things there are in the
Family Bible, the mother might have been startled
some. And the millionaire, too, I reckon. The old
book’s full of a lot of grand fierce old notions they
don’t grow nowadays; sort of vdsdom of the Stone
Age and buried luider the Pyramids. Suppose
somebody had flung old man Merton from the top
of that tower of his, and let him be eaten by dogs at
the bottom, it would be no worse than what hap-
pened to Jezebel. Wasn’t Agag hacked into litde
pieces, for all he went walking delicately ? Merton
walked delicately all his life, damn him— until he got
too delicate to walk at all. But the shaft of the Lord
found him out, as it might have done in the old book;
and struck him dead on the top of his tower to be a
spectacle to the people.”

” The shaft was material, at least,”, said his
companion.

” The Pyramids are mighty material, and they
hold down the dead kings all right,” grinned the
man in the goggles. ” 1 think there’s a lot to be said
for these old material religions. Tho'e’s old carv-
ings that have lasted for thousands of years, showing
their gods and emperors with bended bows; with
hands that look as if they could re^y bend bows of
stone. Material, perhaps— but what materkdsl
Don’t you sometimes stand staring at those old

S5



The Incredulity of Father Brown

eastern patterns and things, till you have a hunch
that that old Lord God is still driving like a dark
Apollo, and shooting black rays of death ? "

“ If he is,** replied Father Brown, “ I might call
him by another name. But I doubt whether Merton
died by a dark ray or even a stone arrow.**

I guess you think h^*s St. Sebastian,** sneered
Drage, “ killed with an arrow. A millionaire must
be a martyr. How do you know he didn’t deserve
it ? You don’t know much about your millionaire,
I Bmcy. Well, let me tell you he deserved it a
hundred times over.”

” Well,” asked Father Brown, gently, ” why
didn’t you murder him ? **

“ You want to know why I didn’t ? ” said the
other, staring. ” Well, you’re a nice sort of clergy-
man.”

“ Not at all,” said the other, as if waving away a
compliment.

” I suppose it’s your way of saying I did,”'
snarled Drage. ** Well, prove it, that’s all. As for
him, I reckon he 'was no loss.”

” Yes he was,” said Father Brown, sharply.
** He was a loss to you. That’s why you didn’t kill
him.”

And he walked out of the room, leaving the man
in goggles gaping after him.

It was nearly a month later that Father Brown
-revisited the house where the third millionaire had

56



The Arrow of Heaven

suffered from the vendetta of Daniel Doom. A sort
of council was held of the persons most interested.
Old Crake sat at the head of the table with his
nephew on his right hand and the lawyer on his left;
the big man with the African features, whose name
appeared to be Harris, was ponderously present, if
only as a material witness; a red-haired, sharp-nosed
individual addressed as Dixon seemed to be the
representative of Pinkerton’s or some such private
agency; and Father Brown slipped unobtrusively
into an empty seat beside him.

Every newspaper in the world was full of the
catastrophe of the colossus of finance, of the great
organizer of the Big Business that bestrides the
modern world; but from the tiny group that had
been nearest to him at the very instant of his death
very little could be learned. The uncle, nephew,
and attendant solicitor declared they were well out-
side the outer wall before the alarm was raised; and
inquiries of the official guardians at both barriers
brought answers that were rather confused, but on
the whole confirmatory. Only one other complica-
tion seemed to call for consideration. It seemed that
round about the time of the death, before or after, a
stranger had been found hanging mysteriously round
the entrance and asking to see Mr. Merton. The
servants had some difficulty in understanding what he
XQMnt, for his language was very obscure; but it was
afterwards considered to be tdso very suspidcnu,

• 57



The Incredulity of Father Brown

$mce he had said something about a mcked man
being destroyed by a word out of the sky.

Peter Wain leaned forward, the eyes bright in
his haggard face, and said :

** ril bet on that, anyhow. Norman Drage.’*

“ And who in the world is Norman Drage ?
asked his uncle.

“ That's what I want to know," replied the young
man. “ I practically asked him, but he has got a
wonderful trick of twisting every straight question
crooked ; it's like lunging at a fencer. He hooked on
to me with hints about the flying-ship of the future:
but I never trusted him much."

" But what sort of a man is he ? " asked Crake.

“ He's a mystagogue," said Father Brown, with
innocent promptitude. “ There are quite a lot of
them about; the sort of men about town who hint to
you in Paris caffs and cabarets that they've lifted the
veil of Isis or know the secret of Stonehenge. In a
case like this they're sure to have some sort of
mystical explanations."

The smooth, dark head of Mr. Barnard Blake,
the lawyer, was inclined politely towards the speaker,
but his smile was faintly hostile.

*' I should hardly have thought, sir," he said,
“ that you had any quarrel with mystical explana-
tions."

" On the contrary," replied Father Brown,
blinking amiably at him. " That’s just why I can

58



The Arrow of Heaven

quarrel with ’em. Any sham lawyer could bam-
boozle me, but he couldn’t bamboozle you; because
you’re a lawyer yourself. Any fool cotild dress up as
a Red Indian and I’d swallow him whole as the only
original Hiawatha; but Mr. Crake would see through
him at once. A swindler could pretend to me that he
knew all about aeroplanes, but not to Captain Wain.
And it’s just the same with the other, don’t you see ?
It’s just because I have picked up a little about
mystics that I have no use for mystagogues. Real
mystics don’t hide mysteries, they reveal them.
They set a thing up in broad daylight, and when
you’ve seen it it’s still a mystery. But the mysta-
gogues hide a thing in darkness and secrecy, and
when you find it, it’s a platitude. But in the case of
Drage, I admit he had also another and more practi-
cal notion, in talking about fire from heaven or bolts
from the blue.”

” And what was his notion ? ” asked Wain. ” I
think it wants watching, whatever it is.”

” Well,” replied the priest, slowly, ” he wanted
us to think the murders were miracles because . . .
well, because he knew they weren’t.”

” Ah,” said Wain, with a sort of hiss, '* I was
waiting for that. In plain words, he is the criminal.”

“ In plain words, he is the criminal who didn’t
commit the crime,” answered Father Brown, calmly.

“ Is that your conception of plain words ? ”
inquired Blake politely.

S9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ You'll be saying I’m the mystagogue now,”
said Father Brown, somewhat abashed, but with a
broad smile, ” but it was really quite accidental.
Drage didn’t commit the crime — I mean this crime.
His only crime was blackmailing somebody, and he
hung about here to do it; but he wasn’t likely to want
the secret to be public property or the whole business
to be cut short by death. We can talk about him
afterwards. Just at the moment, I only want him
cleared out of the way.”

“ Out of the way of what ? ” asked the other.

** Out of the way of the truth,” replied the priest,
looking at him tranquilly, with level eyelids.

” Do you mean,” faltered the other, “ that you
know the truth ? ”

“ I rather think so,” said Father Brown,
modestly.

There was an abrupt silence, after which Crake
cried out suddenly and irrelevantly in a rasping voice.

“ Why, where is that secretary fellow ? Wilton 1
He ought to be here.”

I am in communication with Mr. Wilton,”
said Father Brown gravely; “ in fact, I asked him to
ring me up here in a few minutes from now. I may
say that we’ve worked the thing out together, in ft
manner of speaking.”

“ If you’re working together, I suppose it’s all
right,” grumbled Crake. “ I know he was always a
sort of bloodhound on the trail of this vanishing

6o



The Arrow of Heaven

crook, so perhaps it was well to hunt in couples with
him. But if you know the truth about this, where
the devil did you get it from ? ”

“ I got it from you,” answered the priest, quietly,
and continued to gaze mildly at the glaring veteran.
“ I mean I made the first guess from a hint in a story
of yours about an Indian who threw a knife and hit a
man on the top of a fortress.”

” You’ve said that several times,” said Wain,
with a puzzled air, ” but I can’t see any inference
except that this murderer threw an arrow and hit a
man on the top of a house very like a fortress. But of
course the arrow wasn’t thrown but shot, and would
go much farther. Certainly it went uncommonly
far; but I don’t see how it brings us any farther.”

“ I’m afraid you missed the point of the story,”
said Father Brown. ” It isn’t that if one thing can
go far another can go farther. It is that the wrong use
of a tool can cut both ways. The men pn Crake’s
fort thought of a knife as a thing for a hand-to-hand
fight and forgot that it could be a missile like a
javelin. Some other people I know thought of a
thing as a missile like a javelin and forgot that, after
all, it could be used hand-to-hand as a spear. In
short, the moral of the story is that since a dagger can
be turned into an arrow, so can an arrow be turned
into a dagger.”

They were all looking at him now; but he con-
tinued in the same casual and unconscious tone.

6i



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ Naturally we wondered and worried a good
deal about who shot that arrow through the window
and whether it came from far away, and so on. But
the truth is that nobody shot the arrow at all. It
never came in at the vundow at all.”

” Then how did it come there ? ” asked the
swarthy lawyer, with a rather lowering &ce.

” ^mebody brought it with him, I suppose,”
said Father Brown; “it wouldn’t be hard to carry
or conceal. Somebody had it in his hand as he stood
with Merton in Merton’s own room. Somebody
thrust it into Merton’s throat like a poignard; and
then had the highly intelligent idea of placing the
whole thing at such a place and angle that we all
assumed in a flash that it had flown in at the window
like a bird.”

“ Somebody,” said old Crake, in a voice as heavy
as stone.

The telephone bell rang with a strident and
horrible clamour of insistence. It was in the adjoin-
ing room, and Father Brown had darted there before
anybody else could move.

“ What the devil is it all about ? ” cried Peter
Wain, who seemed all shaken and distracted.

“ He said he expected to be rung up by Wilton,
the secretary,” replied his uncle, in the same dead
voice.

“ I suppose it is Wilton ? ” observed the lawyer,
like one speaking to fill up a silence. But nobody

6 ^



The Arrow of Heaven

answered the question until Father Brown reap-
peared suddenly and silently in the room, bringing
the answer.

“ Gentlemen," he said, when he had resumed his
seat, “ it was you who asked me to look into the truth
about this puzzle ; and having found the truth, I
must tell it, without any pretence of softening the
shock. I'm afraid anybody who pokes his nose into
things like this can’t afford to be a respecter of
persons.”

" I suppose," said Crake, breaking the silence
that followed, “ that means that some of us are
accused, or suspected.”

" All of us are suspected," answered Father
Brown. " I may be suspected myself, for I found
the body."

“ Of course we're suspected," snapped Wain.
“ Father Brown kindly explained to me how I could
have besieged the tower in a flying-machine."

*' No,” replied the priest, with a smile, you
described to me how you could have done it. That
was just the interesting part of it."

" He seemed to think it likely," growled Crake,
" that I killed him myself with a Red Indian arrow."

“ I thought it most unlikely,” said Father Brown,
xnaking rather a wry face. ** I’m sorry if I did wrong,
but I couldn’t think-of any other way of testing the
nuitter. I can hardly think of anything more im-
probabli than the notion that Captain Wain went

«3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

careering in a huge machine past the window, at the
very moment of the murder, and nobody noticed it;
unless, perhaps, it were the notion that a respectable
old gentleman should play at Red Indians with a bow
and arrow behind the bushes, to kill somebody he
could have killed in twenty much simpler ways. But
I had to find out if they had had anything to do with
it; and so I had to accuse them in order to prove their
innocence.”

“ And how have you proved their innocence ? ”
asked Blake, the lawyer, leaning forward eagerly.

“ Only by the agitation they showed when they
were accused,” answered the other.

“ What do you mean, exactly ? ”

If you will permit me to say so,” remarked
Father Brown, composedly enough, ” I did un-
doubtedly think it my duty to suspect them and
everybody else. 1 did suspect Mr. Crake and I did
suspect Captain Wain, in the sense that I considered
the possibility or probability of their guilt. I told
them I had formed conclusions about it; and I will
now tell them what those conclusions were. I was
sure they were innocent, because of the manner and
the moment in which they passed from unconscious-
ness to indignation. So long as they never thought
they were accused, they went on giving me materials
to support the accusation. They practically ex-
plained to me how they might have committed the
crime. Then they suddenly realized with a shock

64



The Arrow of Heaven

and a shout of rage that they were accused; they
realized it long after they might well have expected
to be accused, but long before I had accused them.
Now no guilty person could possibly do that. He
might be snappy and suspicious from the first; or he
might simulate unconsciousness and innocence up to
the end. But wouldn’t begin by making things
worse for himself and then give a great jump and
begin furiously denying the notion he had himself
helped to suggest. That could only come by his
having really failed to realize what he was suggesting.
The self-consciousness of a murderer would always
be at least morbidly vivid enough to prevent him
first forgetting his relation with the thing and then
remembering to deny it. So I ruled you both out
and others for other reasons I needn’t discuss now.
For instance, there was the secretary

“ But I’m not talking about that just now. Look
here, I’ve just heard from Wilton on the phone, and
he’s given me permission to tell you some rather
serious news. Now I suppose you all know by this
time who Wilton was, and what he was after.”

” I know he was after Daniel Doom and
wotildn’t be happy till he got him,” answered Peter
Wain ; ” and I’ve heard the story that he’s the son of
old Horder and that’s why he’s the avenger of blood.
Anyhow, he’s certainly looking for the man called
Doom.”

“ Well,” said Father Brown, ” he has found him.”
65



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Peter Wain sprang to his feet in excitement.

“ The murderer! ”.he cried. “ Is the murderer
in the lock-up already ?

“ No,” said Father Brown, gravely; “ I said the
news was serious, and it's more serious than that.
I'm afraid poor Wilton has taken a terrible respon-
sibility. I'm afraid he’s going to put a terrible
responsibility on us. He hunted the criminal
down, and just when he had him cornered at last —
well, he has taken the law into his own hands.”

” You mean that Daniel Doom——” began the
lawyer.

” I mean that Daniel Doom is dead,” said the
priest. “ There was some sort of wild struggle, and
Wilton killed him.”

“ Serve him right,” growled Mr. Hickory Crake .

” Can’t blame Wilton for downing a crook like
that, especially considering the feud,” assented
Wajn ; ” it was like stepping on a viper.”

“ I don’t agree with you,” said Father Brown.
” I suppose we all talk romantic stuff at random in
defence of lynching and lawlessness; but I have a
suspicion that if we lose om: laws and liberties we
shall regret it. Besides, it seems to me illogical to
say there is something to be said for Wilton com-
mitting murder, without even inquiring whether
there was anything to be said for Drom committing
it. I rather doubt whether Doom was merely a
vulgar assassin; he may have' been a sort of outiaw

66



The Arrow of Heavetr

with a mania about the cup, demanding it with
threats and only killing after a struggle; both victims
were thrown down just outside their houses. The
objection to Wilton’s way of doing it is that we shall
never even hear Doom’s side of the case.”

“ Oh, I’ve no patience with all this sentimental
whitewashing of worthless, murderous blackguards,”
cried Wain, heatedly. “ If Wilton croaked the
criminal he did a jolly good day’s work, and there’s
an end of it.”

“ Quite so, quite so,” said his uncle, nodding
vigorously.

Father Brown’s face had a yet heavier gravity as
he looked slowly round the semicircle of &ces;

“ Is that really what you all think ? ” he asked.
Even as he did so he realized that he was an English-
man and an exile. He realized that he was among
foreigners, even if he was among friends. Around
that ring of foreigners ran a restless fire that was not
native to his own breed; the fiercer spirit of the
western nation that can rebel and lynch and, above
all, combine. He knew that they had already com-
bined.

“ WeU,” said Father Brown, with a sigh, “ I am
to understand, then, that you do definitely condone
this unfortunate man’s crime, or act of private
justice, or whatever you call it. In that case it will
not hurt him if 1 tell you a little more about it.”

He rose suddenly to his feet; and though they

fiy



The Incredulity of Father Brown

saw no meaning in his movement, it seemed in some
way to change or chill the very air in the room.

“ Wilton killed Doom in a rather curious way,”
he began.

“ How did Wilton kill him ? ” asked Crake,
abruptly.

“ With an arrow,” said Father Brown.

Twilight was gathering in the long room, and
daylight dwindling to a gleam from the great win-
dow in the inner room, where the great millionaire
had died. Almost automatically the eyes of the
group turned slowly towards it, but as yet there was
no soUnd. Then the voice of Crake came cracked
and high and senile in a sort of crowing gabble.

** What you mean ? What you mean ? Brander
Merton killed by an arrow. This crook killed by an
arrow ”

“ By the same arrow,” said the priest, ” and at
the same moment.”

Again there was a sort of strangled and yet
swollen and bursting silence, and young Wain
began : ” You mean ”

" I mean that your friend Merton was Daniel
Doom,” said Father Brown firmly; ” and the only
Daniel Doom you’ll ever find. Your friend Merton
was always crazy after that Coptic Cup, that he used
to worship like an idol every day; and in his wild
youth he had really killed two men to get it, though
I still think the deaths may have been in a sense

68



The Arrow of Heaven

accidents of the robbery. Anyhow, he had it; and
that man Drage knew the story and was blackmailing
him. But Wilton was after him for a very different
purpose ; I fancy he only discovered the truth when
he’d got into this house. But anyhow, it was in this
house, and in that room, that this hunt ended, and he
slew the slayer of his father.”

For a long time nobody answered. Then old
Crake could be heard drumming with his fingers on
the table and muttering, ” Brander must have been
mad. He must have been mad.”

‘‘But, good Lordl ” burst out Peter Wain,
‘‘ what are we to do ? What are we to say ? • Oh,
it’s all quite different 1 What about the papers and
the big business people ? Brander Merton is a thing
like the President or the Pope of Rome.”

‘‘ I certainly think it is rather different,” began
Barnard Blake the lawyer, in a low voice. *‘ The
difference involves a whole ”

Father Brown struck the table so that the glasses
on it rang; and they could almost fancy a ghostly
echo from the mysterious chalice that still stood in
the room beyond.

*‘ Nol ” he cried, in a voice like a pistol-shot.
” There shall be no (Bfference. J gave you your
chance of pitying the poor deni when you thought
he was a common criminal. You wouldn’t listen
then ; you were all for private vengeance then. You
were all for letting him be butchered like a wild beast

69



The Incredulity of Father Brown

without a hearing or a public trial, and said he had
only got his deserts. Very well then, if Daniel Doom
has got his deserts, Brander Merton has got his
deserts. If that was good enough for Doom, by all
that is holy it is good enough for Merton. Take
your wild justice or our dull legality; but in the name
of Almighty God, let there be an equal lawlessness
or an equal law.”

Nobody answered except the lawyer, and he
answered with something like a snarl.

” What will the police say if they tell them we
mean to condone a crime ? ”

” What will they say if I tell them you did con-
done it ? ” replied Father Brown. “ Your respect
for the law comes rather late, Mr. Barnard Blake.”

After a pause he resumed in a milder tone: “ I,
for one, am ready to tell the truth if the proper
authorities ask me; and the rest of you can do as you
like'. But as a fact, it will make very little difference.
Wilton only rang me up to tell me that 1 was now
free to lay his confession before you; for whra you
heard it, he would be beyond pursuit.”

He walked slowly into the inner room and stood
there by the little table beside which the millionaire
had di^. The Coptic Cup still stood in the same
place, and he remained there for a space staring at
its cluster of all the colours of the rainbow, and
beyondit into a blue abyss of slqr.



Ill

THE ORACLE OF THE DOG


“ Yes,” said Father Brown, “ I always like a dog,
so long as he isn't spelt backwards.”

Those who are quick in talking are not always
quick in listening. Sometimes even their brilliancy
produces a sort of stupidity. Father Brown’s
friend and companion was a young man widi a
stream of ideas and stories, an enthusiastic young
man named Fiennes, with eager blue eyes and blond
hair that seemed to be brushed bacl^ not merely
with a hair-brush but with the wind of the world
as he rushed through it But he stopped in the
torrent of his talk in a momentary bewilderment
before he saw the priest’s very simple meanmg.

"You mean that people make too much of
them ? ” he said. “ Well, I don’t know. They’re
marvellous creatures. Sometimes I think diey
know a lot more than we do.”

Fadier Brown said nothing ; but continued
to stroke the head of die big retriever in a half-
abstracted but apparently soothing fuhkm.

*'Why,” said Fiennes, wanning agaib to his
mondogue, ” there was a dog in the case I’ve come

7 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

to see you about ; what they call the ' Invisible
Murder Case,’ you know. It’s a strange story,
but from my point of view the dog is about the
strangest thing in it. Of course, there’s the
mystery of the crime itself, and how old Druce can
have been killed by somebody else when he was all
alone in the summer-house——”

The hand stroking the dog stopped for a moment
in its rhythmic movement; and Father Brown said
calmly, ** Oh, it was a summer-house, was it ? ”

” I thought you’d read all about it in the papers,”
answered Fiennes. “ Stop a minute; I believe I’ve
got a cutting that will give you all the particulars.”
He produced a strip of newspaper from his pocket
and handed it to the priest, who began to read it,
holding it close to his blinking eyes with one hand
while the other continued its half-conscious caresses
of the dog. It looked like the parable of a man
not letting his right hand know what his left hand
did.


“ Many mystery stories, about men murdered bdiind
locked doors and windows, and murderers escaping widiout
meaiu of extrance and exit, have come true in the oouise
of the extraordinary events at Cranston on the coast of York-
diire, where Colonel Druce was found stabbed from behind
by a dagger that has entirely disappeared from the scene^
and apparendy even from the nei^bouihood.

‘*The summer-house in which he died was indeed aooe»>
■Hrle at one entrance the ordinary doorway sriiich looked

7J



The Oracle of the Dog

down the central walk of the garden towards the house.
But by a combination of events almost to be called a coin-
cidence, it appears that both the path and the entrance were
watched during the crucial time, and there is a chain of
witnesses who confirm each other. The summer-house
stands at the extreme end of the garden, where there is no
exit or entrance of any kind. The central garden path is a
lane between two ranks of tall delphiniums, planted so close
that any stray step ofF the path would leave its traces ;
and both path and plants run right up to the very mouth of
the summer-house, so that no stra3dng from that straight
path could fail to be observed, and no other mode of entrance
can be imagined.

^ Patrick Floyd, secretary of the murdered man, testified
that he had been in a position to overlook the whole garden
from the time when Colonel Druce last appeared alive
in the doorway to the time when he was found dead; as he^
Floyd, had been on the top of a step-ladder clipping the garden
hedge. Janet Druce, the dead man’s daughter, confirmed
this, saying that she had sat on the terrace of the house
throughout that time and had seen Floyd at his work.
Touching some part of the dme, this is again supported
by Donald Druce, her brother, who overlooked the garden
standing at his bedroom window in his dressing-gown,
for he had risen late. Lastly the account is conristent with
that given by Dr. Valentine, a neighbour, who called for a
lime to talk with Miss Druce on the terrace, and by die
Colonel’s solicitor, Mr. Aubrey Traill, who was apparendy
the last to see the murdered man aUve— ipresumably with die
owepdon of the murderer.

Ail are agreed that the course of events was as foUows I

^ 73



The Incredulity of Father Brown

about half-past three in the afternoon, Miss Druce went down
the path to ask her fiither when he would like tea ; but he
said he did not want any and was waiting to see Traill, his
lawyer, who was to be sent to him in the summer-house.
The girl then came away and met Traill coming down the
path \ she directed him to her father and he went in as
directed. About half an hour afterwards he came out again,
the Colonel coming with him to the door and showing him-
self to all appearance in health and even high spirits. He
had been somewhat annoyed earlier in the day by hi3 son's
irregular hours, but seemed to recover his temper in a per-
fectly normal fashion, and had been rather markedly genial
in receiving other visitors, including two of his nephews
who came over for the day. But as these were out walking
during the whole period of the tragedy, they had no evidence
to give. It is said, indeed, that the Colonel was not on very
good terms with Dr. Valentine, but that gentleman only had
a brief interview with the daughter of the house, to whom he
is supposed to be paying serious attentions.

Traill, the solicitor, says he left the Colonel entirely
alone in the summer-house, and this is confirmed by Floyd's
bird’s-eye view of the garden, which showed nobody else
passing the only Entrance. Ten minutes later Miss Druce
again went down the garden and had not reached the end of
the path when she saw her fiither, who was conspicuous by
his white linen coat, lying in a heap on the floor. &e uttered
a scream which brought others to the spot, and on enterii^
the place they found the Colonel lying dead beside h» basket-
chair, which was also upset Dr. Valentine^ who was still
in the immediate nei^bourhood, tesdfied that the wound,
was nuale by some sort ofsriletto, entering under the shouldor-

74



The Oracle of the Dog

blade and piercing the heart The police have Matched the
neighbourhood for such a weapon, but no trace of it can be
found."


" So Colonel Druce wore a white coat, did he ? "
said Father Brown as he put down the paper.

" Trick he learnt in the tropics,” replied Fiennes
with some wonder. " He’d had some queer adven-
tures there, by his own account; and I fancy his
dislike of Valentine was connected with the doctor
coming from the tropics, too. But it’s all an infernal
puzzle. The account there is pretty accurate; I
didn’t see the tragedy, in the sense of the discovery;
I was out walking with the young nephews and’ the
dog— ^e dog 1 wanted to tell you about. But I
saw the stage set for it as described: the straight
lane between the blue flowers right up to the dark
entrance, and the lawyer going down it in his
blacks and his silk hat, and the red head of the secre-
tary showing high above the green hedge as he
worked on it with his shears. Nobody could have
mistaken that red head at any distance; and if people
say they saw it there all the time, you may be sure
they did. This red-haired secretary Floyd is quite
a character; a breathless, boimding sort of fellow,
always doing everybody's work as he was doing the
gerdener's. I think he is an American; he's certainly
got the American view of life; what they call ^
^dew-pmat, bless 'em.”


75



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ What about the lawyer ? ” asked Father
Brown.

There was a silence and then Fiennes spoke
quite slowly for him. “ Traill struck me as a
singular man. In his fine black clothes he was
almost foppish, yet you can hardly call him fashion-
able. For he wore a pair of long, luxuriant black
whiskers such as haven’t been seen since Victorian
times. He had rather a fine grave face and a fine
grave manner, but every now and then he seemed
to remember to smile. And when he showed his
white teeth he seemed to lose a little of his dignity
and there was something faintly fawning about him.
It may have been only embarrassment, for he would
also fidget with his cravat and his tie-pin, which were
at once handsome and unusual, like himself. If I
could think of anybody — ^but what’s the good,
when the whole thing’s impossible ? Nobody
knows who did it. Nobody knows how it could be
done. At least there’s only one exception I’d
make, and that’s why I really mentioned the whole
thing. The dog knows.”

Father Brown sighed and then Said absently:
** You were there as a friend of young Donald,
'Weren’t you ? He didn’t go on your walk with
you ? ”

** No,” replied Fiennes smiling. “ The yoting
scoundrel had gone to bed that morning and got up
that afternoon. I went with his cousins, two young

76



The Oracle of the Dog

officers from India, and our conversation was trivial
enough. I remember the elder, whose name I
think is Herbert Druce and who is an authority on
horse-breeding, talked about nothing but a mare
he had bought and the moral character of the man
who sold her ; while his brother Harry seemed to
be brooding on his bad luck at Monte Carlo.
I only mention it to show you, in the light of what
happened on our walk, that there was nothing
psychic about us. The dog -was the only mystic
in our company.”

“ What sort of a dog was he P ” asked the priest.

" Same breed as that one,” answered Fiennes.
“ That’s what started me off on the story, your saying
you didn’t believe in believing in a dog. He’s a
big black retriever named Nox, and a suggestive
name too ; for I think what he did a darker mystery
than the murder. You know Druce’s house and
garden are by the sea; we walked about a mile from
it along the sands and then turned back, going the
other way. We passed a rather curious rock called
the Rock of Fortune, famous in the neighbourhood
because it’s one of those examples of one stone
barely balanced on another, so that a touch would
knock it over. It is not redly very high, but the
hanging outline of it makes it look a little wild and
sinister; at least it made it look so to me, for I don’t
imagine my jolly young companions were afflicted
with the picturesque. But it may be that I was

77



The Incredulity of Father Brown

beginning to feel an atmosphere; for just then the
question arose of whether it was time to go back to
tea, and even then I think I had a premonition that
time counted for a good deal in the business.
Neither Herbert Druce nor I had a watch, so we
called out to his brother, who was some paces behind,
having stopped to light his pipe under the hedge.
Hence it happened that he shouted out the hour,
which was twenty past four, in his big voice through
the growing twilight; and somehow the loudness of
it made it sound like the proclamation of something
tremendous. His unconsciousness seemed to make
it all the more so; but that was always the way with
omens; and particular ticks of the clock were really
very ominous things that afternoon. According
to Dr. Valentine’s testimony, poor Druce had actually
died just about half*past four.

“ Well, they said we needn’t go home for ten
minutes, and we walked a little farther along the
sands, doing nothing in particular — throwing stones
for the dog and throwmg sticks into the sea for
him to swim after. But to me the twilight seemed
to grow oddly oppressive and the very shadow of the
top-heavy Rock of Fortune lay on me like a load.
And then the curious thing ^ppened. Nox had
just brought back Herbert’s walking^tick out of
the sea and his brother had thrown his in also. Hie
dog swam out again, but just about what must have
been the stroke of the hi^-hour, he stopped swim-

78



The Oracle of the Dog

ming. He came back again on to the shore and
stood in front of us. Then he suddenly threw up
his head and sent up a howl or wail of woe, if ever
I heard one in the world.

“ ‘ What the devil’s the matter with the dog ? '
asked Herbert; but none of us could answer.
There was a long silence after the brute’s wailing
and whining died away on the desolate shore; and
then the silence was broken. As I live, it was
broken by a faint and far-off shriek, like the shriek
of a woman from beyond the hedges inland. We
didn’t know what it was then; but we knew after-
wards. It was the cry the girl gave when she first
saw the body of her father.”

” You went back, I suppose,” said Father
Brown patiently. “ What happened then ? ”

“ I’ll tell you what happened then,” said
Fiennes with a grim emphasis. “ When we got
back into that garden the first thing we saw was
Traill the lawyer; I can see him now with his black
hat and black whiskers relieved against the perspec-
tive of the blue flowers stretching down to the
summer-house, with the sunset and the strange
outline of the Rock of Fortune in the distance.
His fice and figure were in shadow against the sun-
set; but I swear the white teeth were showing in
his head and he was smiling.

*' The moment Noz saw that man, the dog
dashed forward and stood in the middle of the pa^

79



The Incredulity of Father Brown

barking at him madly, murderbusly, volleying out
curses that were almost verbal in their dreadful
distinctness of hatred. And the man doubled up
and fled along the path between the flowers.”

Father Brown sprang to his feet with a startling
impatience.

” So the dog denounced him, did he ? ” he
cried. ” The oracle of the dog condemned him.
Did you see what birds were dying, and are you
sure whether they were on the right hand or the
left ? Did you consult the augurs about the sacri-
fices ? Surely you didn’t omit to cut open the dog
and examine his entrails. That is the sort of scien-
tific test you heathen hximanitarians seem to trust
when you are thinking of taking away the life and
honour of a man.”

Fiennes sat gaping for an instant before he
found breath to say, ” Why, what’s the matter with
you ? What have I done now ? ”

A sort of anxiety came back into the priest’s
eyes— the anxiety of a man who has run against
a post in the dark and wonders for a moment
whether he has hurt it.

” I’m most awfully sorry,” he said with sincere
distress. '* I beg your pardon for being so rude;
pray forgive me.”

Fiennes looked at him curiously. I some-
times think you are more of a mystery than any ci
the mysteries,” he said. “ But anyhow, if you don't

8o



The Oracle of the Dog

believe in the mystery of the dog, at least you can't
get over the mystery of the man. You can’t deny
that at the very moment when the beast came back
from the sea and bellowed, his master’s soul was
driven out of his body by the blow of some unseen
power that no mortal man can trace or even imagine.
And as for the lawyer, I don’t go only by the dog;
there are other curious details too. He struck me
as a smooth, smiling, equivocal sort of person ; and
one of his tricks seemed like a sort of hint. You
know the doctor and the police were on the spot
very quickly; Valentine was brought back when
walking away from the house, and he telephoned
instantly. That, with the secluded house, small
numbers, and enclosed space, made it pretty possible
to search everybody who could have been near; and
everybody was thoroughly searched — for a weapon.
The whole house, garden, and shore were combed
for a weapon. The disappearance of the dagger
is almost as crazy as the disappearance of the
man.”

“ The disappearance of the dagger,” said
Father Brown, nodding. He seemed to have
become suddenly attentive.

“ Well,” continued Fiennes, “ I told you that
man Traill had a trick of fidgeting with his tie
and tie-pin— especially his tie-pin. His pin, like
himself, was at once showy and old-fiuhioned.
It had one of those stones wi^ concentric coloured



The Incredulity of Father Brown

rings that look like an eye; and his own Concentra-
tion on it got on my nerves, as if he had been a
Cyclops with one eye in the middle of his body.
But the pin was not only large but long; and it
occurred to me that his anxiety about its adjustment
was because it was even longer than it looked; as
long as a stiletto in fact.**

Father Brown nodded thoughtfully. “ Was
any other instrument ever suggested ? ** he asked.

“ There was another suggestion,** answered
Fiennes, “ from one of the young Druces — ^the
cousins, I mean. Neither Herbert nor Harry
Druce would have struck one at first as likely to
be of assistance in scientific detection ; but while
Herbert was really the traditional type of heavy
Dragoon, caring for nothing but horses and being
an ornament to the Horse Guards, his younger
brother Harry had been in the Indian Police and
knew something about such things. Indeed in his
own way he was- quite clever; and I rather fimey he
had been too clever; I mean he had left the police
through breaking some red-tape regulations and
taking some sort of risk and responsibility of his
own. Anyhow, he was in some sense a detective
out of work, and threw himself into this btisiness
with more t^n the ardour of an amateur. And k
was with him that I had an argument about tik
weapon— «n argument that led to something new.
It began by his countering my description of the

Bs



The Oracle of the Dog

dog barking at Traill; and he said that a dog at
his worst didn’t bark, but growled.”

“ He was quite right there,” observed the
priest.

“ This young fellow went on to say that, if it
came to that, he’d heard Nox growling at other
people before then; and among others at Floyd the
secretary. I retorted that his own argument
answered itself; for the crime couldn’t be brought
home to two or three people, and least of all to
Floyd, who was as innocent as a harum-scarum
schoolboy, and had been seen by everybody all the
time perched above the garden hedge with his. fan
of red hair as conspicuous as a scarlet cockatoo.
’ I know there’s difficulties anyhow,’ said my col-
league, ‘ but I wish you’d come with me down the
garden a minute. 1 want to show you something
I don’t think anyone else has seen.’ This was on
the very day of the discovery, and the garden was
just as it had been : the step-ladder was still standing
by the hedge, and just under the hedge my guide
stooped and disentangled something from the deep
grass. It was the shears used for clipping the
hedge, and on the point of one of them was a sxnear
of blood.”

There was a short silence, and then Father
Brown said suddenly, “What was the lawyer
there for ? ”

*' He told us the Colonel sent for him to alter



The Incredulity of Father Brown

his will,** answered Fiennes. ' “ And, by the way,
there was another thing about the business of
the will that I ought to mention. You see, the will
wasn*t actually signed in the summer-house that
afternoon.**

“ I suppose not,** said Father Brown ; “ there
would have to be two witnesses.**

“ The lawyer actually came down the day before
and it was signed then; but he was sent for again
next day because the old man had a doubt about
one of the witnesses and had to be reassured.’*

“ Who were the witnesses ? ** asked Father
Brown.

*' That’s just the point,** replied his informant
eagerly, *' the witnesses were Floyd the secretary and
this Dr. Valentine, the foreign sort of surgeon or
whatever he is; and the two have a quarrel. Now
I’m boimd to say that the secretary is something
of a busybody. He’s one of those hot and headlong
people whose warmth of temperament has unfor-
tunately turned mostly to pugnacity and bristling
suspicion; to distrusting people instead of to trust-
ing them. That sort of red-haired red-hot fellow
is always either universally credulous or universally
incredulous; and sometimes both. He was not
only a Jack of all trades, but he knew better than
all tradesmen. He not only knew everything, but
he warned everybody against everybody. All that
must be taken into account in his suspicions about

84



The Oracle of the Dog

Valentine; but in that particular case there seems
to have been something behind it. He said the
name of Valentine was not really Valentine. He
said he had seen him elsewhere known by the name
of De Villon. He said it would invalidate the will ;
of course he was kind enough to explain to the
lawyer what the law was on that point. They were
both in a frightful wax.”

Father Brown laughed. ” People often are
when they are to witness a will,” he said, “ for one
thing, it means that they can’t have any legacy under
it. But what did Dr. Valentine say ? No doubt
the universal secretary knew more about the doctor’s
name than the doctor did. But even the doctor
might have some information about his own name.”

Fiennes paused a moment before he replied.

” Dr. Vdentine took it in a curious way.
Dr. Valentine is a curious man. His appearance is
rather striking but very foreign. He is young but
wears a beard cut square; and his face is very pale,
dreadfully pale and dreadfully serious. His eyes
have a sort of ache in them, as if he ought to wear
glasses or had given himself a headache with think>
ing; but he is quite handsome and always very
formally dressed, with a top hat and a dark coat
and a little red rosette. His manner is rather cold
ud haughty, and he has a way of staring at you which
is very disconcerting. When thus charged with
having changed his name, he merely stared like a

85



The Incredulity of Father Brown

sphinx and then said with a little laug^ that he
supposed Americans had no names to change.
At that 1 think the Colonel also got into a fuss and
said all sorts of angry things to the doctor; all the
more angry because of the doctor’s pretensions to
a future place in his family. But I shouldn’t have
thought much of that but for a few words that I
happened to hear later, early in the afternoon of the
tragedy. I don’t want to make a lot of them, for
they weren’t the sort of words on which one would
like, in the ordinary way, to play the eavesdropper*
As I was passing out towards the front gate with my
two companions and the dog, I heard voices which
told me that Dr. Valentine and Miss Druce had with-
drawn for a moment into the shadow of the house,
in an angle behind a row of flowering plants, and
were talking to each other in passionate whisperings
— 'eometimes almost like hissings; for it was some-
thing of a lovers’ quarrel as well as a lovers’ tryst.
Nobody repeats the sort of things they said for the
most part; but in an unfortunate business like this
I’m bound to say that there was repeated more than
once a phrase about killing somebody. Iti flut,
the girl seemed to be begging him not to kill some-
body, or sa]ring that no provocation could justify
killing anylmdy; which seems an unusual sort iS.
talk to address to a gentleman who has dropped in
to tea.”

” Do you know,” asked the priest, ” whedier

S6



The Oracle of the Dog

Dr. Valentine seemed to be very angry after the
scene with the secretary and the Colonel — I mean
about witnessing the will ?

“ By all accounts,” replied the other, ” he wasn’t
half so angry as the secretary was. It was the
secretary who went away raging after witnessing the
will.”

“ And now,” said Father Brown, ” what about
the will itself ? ”

“ The Colonel was a very wealthy man, and his
will was important. Traill wouldn’t tell us the
alteration at that stage, but I have since heard,
only this morning in fact, that most of the money
was transferred from the son to the daughter.
I told you that Druce was wild with my ftiend
Donald over his dissipated hours.”

“ The question of motive has been rather
over-shadowed by the question of method,” ob-
served Father Brown thoughtfully. “ At that
moment, apparently. Miss Druce was the immediate
gainer by the death.”

” Go^ God 1 What a cold-blooded way of
talking,” cried Fiennes, staring at him. ” You
don’t r^y mean to hint that she——”

” Is she going to marry that Dr. Valentine ? ”
asked the o^er.

'* Some people are against it,” answered his
I ftiend. ” But he is lik^ and respected in the
I plaoe and is a skilled and devoted surgeon.”

87



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ So devoted a surgeon,”' said Father Brown,
” that he had surgical instruments with him when he
went to call on the young lady at tea-time. For
he must have used a lancet or something, and he
never seems to have gone home.”

Fiennes sprang to his feet and looked at him
in a heat of inquiry. ” You suggest he might have
used the very same lancet——”

Father Brown shook his head. ” All these
suggestions are fancies just now,” he said. ” The
problem is not who did it or what did it, but how it
was done. We might find many men and even
many tools — ^pins and shears and lancets. But
how did a man get into the room ? How did even
a pin get into it ? ”

He was staring reflectively at the ceiling as he
spoke, but as he said the last words his eye cocked in
an alert fashion as if he had suddenly seen a curious
fly on the ceiling.

“ Well, what would you do about it ? ” asked the
young man. ” You have a lot of experience*
what would you advise now ? ”

“ I’m afraid I’m not much use,” said Father
Brown with a sigh. '* I can’t suggest very much
without having ever been near the place or the people.
For the moment you can only go on with local in-
quiries. I gather that your friend from the Indian
Police is more or less in charge of your inquiry down
there. I should run down and see how he is getting

88



The Oracle of the Dog

on. See what he's been doing in the way of amateur
detection. There may be news already.”

As his guests, the biped and the quadruped, dis-
appeared, Father Brown took up his pen and. went
back to his interrupted occupation of planning a
course of lectures on the Encyclical Rerum Novarum.
The subject was a large one and he had to re-cast
it more than once, so that he was somewhat similarly
employed some two days later when the big black
dog again came bounding into the room and
sprawled all over him with enthusiasm and excite-
ment. The master who followed the dog shared
the excitement if not the enthusiasm. He had been
excited in a less pleasant fashion, for his blue eyes
seemed to start from his head and his eager i^e
was even a little pale.

” You told me,” he said abruptly and without
preface, “ to find out what Harry Druce was doing.
Do you know what he’s done ? ”

The priest did not reply, and the young man
went on in jerky tones ;

” I’ll tell you what he’s done. He’s killed
himself.”

Father Brown’s lips moved only fiundy, and
there was nothing practical about what he was say-
ing— nothing that has anything to do with this
story or this world.

“You give me the creeps sometimes,” said
Fiennes. ” Did you— did you expect this ? ”

o 89



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ I thought it possible,” said Father Brown ;
'* that was why I asked you to go and see what he
was doing. 1 hoped you might not be too late.”

” It was I who found him,” said Fiennes rather
huskily. ” It was the ugliest and most uncanny
thing I ever knew. I went down that old garden
again and I knew there was something new and un-
natural about it besides the murder. The flowers
still tossed about in blue masses on each side of the
black entrance into the old grey summer-house;
but to me the blue flowers looked like blue devils
dancing before some dark cavern of the under-
world. I looked all round; everything seemed to
be in its ordinary place. But the queer notion
grew on me that there was something wrong with
the very shape of the sky. And then I saw what
it was. The Rock of Fortune always rose in
the background beyond the garden hedge and
against the sea. And the Rock of Fortune was
gone.”

Father Brown had lifted his head and was listten-
ing intently.

” It was as if a mountain had walked away
out of a landscape or a moon fallen from the sky;
though I knew, of course, that a touch at any time
would have tipped the thing over. Something
possessed me and I rushed down that garden path
like the wind and went crashing through that hedge
aa if it were a spider's web. It was a thin hed^

90



The Oracle of the Dog

really, though its imdisturbed trimness had made
it serve all the purposes of a wall. On the shore I
found the loose rock fallen from its pedestal; and
poor Harry Druce lay like a wreck underneath it.
One arm was thrown round it in a sort of embrace
as if he had pulled it down on himself ; and on the
broad brown sands beside it, in large crazy lettering,
he had scrawled the words, “ The Rock of Fortune
falls on the Fool.”

” It was the Colonel’s will that did that,” ob-
served Father Brown. ” The young man had staked
everything on profiting himself by Donald’s dis-
grace, especially when his uncle sent for him on, the
same day as the lawyer, and welcomed him with so
much warmth. Otherwise he was done; he’d lost
his police job; he was beggared at Monte Carlo.
And he killed himself when he found he’d killed
his kinsman for nothing.”

“ Here, stop a minute ! ” cried the staring
Fiennes. “ You’re going too fast for me.”

” Talking about the will, by the way,” continued
Father Brown calmly, “ before I forget it, or we go
on to bigger things, there was a simple explanation,
I think, of all that business about the doctor’s name.
I rather fancy I have heard both names before some-
where. The doctor is really a French nobleman
with the title of the Marquis de Villon. But he is
also an ardent Republican and has abandoned his
tide and &llen back on the forgotten fomily surnamn.

9 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

* With your Citizen Riquetti ' you have puzzled
Europe for ten days.* ’*

“ What is that ? " asked the young man blankly.

“ Never mind,” said the priest. “ Nine times
out of ten it is a rascally thing to change one’s
name ; but this was a piece of fine fanaticism.
That’s the point of his sarcasm about Americans
having no names — ^that is, no titles. . Now in
England the Marquis of Hartington is never
called Mr. Hartington; but in France the
Marquis de Villon is called M. de V^illon. So it
might well look like a change of name. As for the
talk about killing, I fancy that also was a point of
French etiquette. The doctor was talking about
challenging Floyd to a duel, and the girl was trying
to dissuade him.”

“ Oh, I see,” cried Fiennes slowly. ** Now
I understand what she meant.”

” And what is that about ? ” asked his com-
panion, smiling.'

” Well,” said the young man, “ it was some-
thing that happened to me just before I found that
poor fellow’s ^dy ; only ^e catastrophe drove it
out of my head. I suppose it’s hard to remember a
little romantic idyll when you’ve just come on top
of a tragedy. But as I went down the lanes leading
to the Colonel’s old place, 1 met his daughter
walking with Dr. Valentine. She was in mourning
of course, and he always wore black as if he were



The Oracle of the Dog

going to a funeral; but I can’t say that their faces
were very funereal. Never have 1 seen two people
looking in their own way more respectably radiant
and cheerful. They stopped and saluted me and
then she told me they were married and living in a
little house on the outskirts of the town, where the
doctor was continuing his practice. This rather
surprised me, because I knew that her old father’s
will had left her his property; and I hinted at it
delicately by saying I was going along to her father’s
old place and had half expected to meet her there.
But she only laughed and said, “ Oh, we’ve given
up all that. My husband doesn’t like heiresses.”
And I discovered with some astonishment they really
had insisted on restoring the property to poor
Donald; so I hope he’s had a healthy shock and will
treat it sensibly. There was never much really the
matter with him; he was very young and his hither
was not very wise. But it was in connexion with
that that she said something I didn’t understand
at the time ; but now I’m sure it must be as you
say. She said with a sort of sudden and splendid
arrogance that was entirely altruistic:

” I hope it’ll stop that red-haired fool from
fussing , any more about the will. Does he think
my husband, who has given up a crest and a coronet
as old as the Crusades for his principles, would kill an
old man in a summer-house for a legacy like that ? ”
Then she laughed again and said, ’ My husband

«3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

isn’t killing anybody except in' the way of business.
Why, he didn’t even ask his friends to call on the
secretary.’ Now, of course, I see what she meant.”

“ I see part of what she meant, of course,” said
Father Brown. What did she mean exactly by
the secretary fussing about the will ? ”

Fiennes smiled as he answered. ” 1 wish you
knew the secretary. Father Brown. It would be a
joy to you to watch him make things hum, as he
calls it. He made the house of mourning hum.
He filled the funeral with all the snap and zip of the
brightest sporting event. There was no holding
him, after something had really happened. I’ve
told you how he used to oversee the gardener as
he did the garden, and how he instructed the lawyer
in the law. Needless to say, he also instructed
the surgeon in the practice of surgery; and as the
surgeon was Dr. Valentine, you may be sure it
ended in accusing him of something worse than
bad surgery. The secretary got it fixed in his
red head that the doctor had committed the crime;
and when the police arrived he was perfectly sub-
lime. Need I say that he became on the spot the
greatest of all amateur detectives ? Sherlock
Holmes never towered over Scotland Yard with
more Titanic intellectual pride and scorn than
Colonel Druce’s private secretary over the police
investigating Colonel Druce’s death. I tell you
it was a joy to see him. He strode about with an

94



The Oracle of the Dog

abstracted air, tossing his scarlet crest of hair and
giving curt impatient replies. Of course it was his
demeanour during these days that made Druce’s
daughter so wild with him. Of course he had a
theory. It’s just the sort of theory a man would
have in a book; and Floyd is the sort of man who
ought to be in a book. He’d be better fun and
less bother in a book.”

” What was his theory ? ” asked the other.

“ Oh, it was full of pep,” replied Fiennes
gloomily. “ It would have been glorious copy if
it could have held together for ten minutes longer.
He said the Colonel was still alive when they found
him in the summer-house and the doctor killed him
with the surgical instrument on pretence of cutting
the clothes.”

” I see,” said the priest. " I suppose he was
lying flat on his face on the mud floor as a form of
siesta.”

” It’s wonderful what hustle will do,” continued
his informant. I believe Floyd would have got
his great theory into the papers at any rate, and per.
haps had the doctor arrested, when all these things
were blown sky high as if by dynamite by the dis-
covery of that dead body Ipng under the Rock of
Fortune. And that’s, what we come back to after
all. I suppose the suicide is almost a confession.
But nobody will ever know the whole story.”

There was a silence, and then the priest said
9S



The Incredulity of Father Brown

modestly, “ I rather think I know the whole
story.”

Fiennes stared. ” But look here,” he cried,
” how do you come to know the whole story, or
to be sure it’s the true story ? You’ve been sitting
here a hundred miles away writing a sermon; do
you mean to tell me you really know what happened
already ? If you’ve really come to the end, where
in the world do you begin What started you off
with your own story ? ”

Father Brown jumped up with a very unusual
excitement and his first exclamation was like an
explosion.

‘‘ The dog 1 ” he cried. The dog, of course 1
You had the whole story in your hands in the busi*
ness of the dog on the beach, if you’d only noticed
the dog properly.”

Fiennes stared still more. “ But you told
me before that my feelings about the dog
were all nonsense, and the dog had nothing to do
with it.”

” The dog had everything to do with it,” said
Father Brown, “ as you’d have found out if you’d
only treated the dog as a dog and not as God
Almighty judging the souls of men.”

He paused in an embarrassed way for a moment,
and then said, with a rather pathetic air of apology:

“ The truth is, I happen to be awfully fond of
dogs. And it seemed to me that in all this lurid

96



The Oracle of the Dog

halo of dog superstitions nobody was really thinking
about the poor dog at all. To begin with a snudl
point, about his barking at the lawyer or growling
at the secretary. You asked how I could guess
things a hundred miles away; but honestly it’s mostly
to your credit, for you described people so well
that I know the types. A man like Traill who
frowns usually and smiles suddenly, a man who
fiddles with things, especially at his throat, is
a nervous, easily embarrassed man. I shouldn’t
wonder if Floyd, the efficient secretary, is nervy and
jumpy too; those Yankee hustlers often are. Other-
wise he wouldn’t have cut his fingers on the shears
and dropped them when he heard Janet Druce
scream.

“ Now dogs hate nervous people. I don’t
know whether they make the dog nervous too;
or whether, being after all a brute, he is a bit of
a bully; or whether his canine vanity (which is
colossal) is simply offended at not being liked.
But anyhow thm was nothing in poor Nox
protesting against those people, except that he
disliked them for being afraid of him. Now I
know you’re awfully clever, and nobody of sense
sneers at cleverness. But I sometimes fiuicy,
for instance, that you are too clever to under-
stand animals. Sometimes you are too clever to
mderatand men, especially when they act almost as
simply as animals. Aninuls are very literal; they

97



The Incredulity of Father Brown

live in a world of truisms. Take this case; a dog
barks at a man and a man runs away from a dog.
Now you do not seem to be quite simple enough
to see the fact; that the dog barked because he dis-
liked the man and the man fled because he was
frightened of the dog. They had no other motives
and they needed none. But you must read psycho-
logical mysteries into it and suppose the dog had
super-normal vision, and was a mysterious mouth-
piece of doom. You must suppose the man was
running away, not from the dog but from the hang-
man. And yet, if you come to think of it, all this
deeper psychology is exceedingly improbable. If
the dog really could completely and consciously
realize the murderer of his master, he wouldn’t
stand yapping as he might at a curate at a tea-party;
he's much more likely to fly at his throat. And on
the other hand, do you redly think a man who had
hardened his heart to murder an old friend and then
walk about smiling at the old friend’s family,
under the eyes of his old friend’s (laughter and post-
mortem doctor — do you think a man like that would
be doubled up by mere remorse because a dog
barked ? He might feel the tragic irony of it; it
nught shake his soul, like any other tragic trifle.
But he wouldn’t rush madly the length of a garden
to escape from the only witness whom he 'knew to be
unable to talk. People have a panic like that when
they are frightened, not of tragic ironies, but of

98



The Oracle of the Dog

teeth. The whole thing is simpler than you can
understand.

‘‘But when we come to that business by the
seashore, things are much more interesting. As
you stated them, they were much more puzzling.
I didn’t understand that tale of the dog going in
and out of the water; it didn’t seem to me a doggy
thing to do. If Nox had been very much upset
about something else, he might possibly have
refused to go after the stick at all. He’d probably
go off nosing in whatever direction he suspected
the mischief. But when once a dog is actually
chasing a thing, a stone or a stick or a rabbit, 'my
experience is that he won’t stop for anything but
the most peremptory command, and not always for
that. That he should turn round because his mood
changed seems to me unthinkable.”

“ But he did turn round,” insisted Fiennes,
“ and came back without the stick.”

” He came back without the stick for the best
reason in the world,” replied the priest. ” He came
back because he couldn’t find it. He whined
because he couldn’t find it. That’s the sort of thing
a dog really does whine about. A dog is a devil
of a ritualist. He is as particular about the pre-
cise routine of a game as a child about the precise
1‘cpetition of a fiury-tale. In this case sometiung
gone wiong with the game. He 'came back
to oomjdain seriously of the conduct of the stick;

99



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Never had such a thing happened before. Never
had an eminent and distinguished dog been so
treated by a rotten old walking-stick."

" Why, what had the walking-stick done ? ’’
inquired the young man.

It had sunk," said Father Brown.

Fiennes said nothing, but continued to stare,
and it was the priest who continued :

It had sunk because it was not really a stick,
but a rod of steel with a very thin shell of cane and
a sharp point. In other words, it was a sword-stick.
I suppose a murderer never got rid of a bloody
weapon so oddly and yet so naturally as by throwing
it into the sea for a retriever."

“ I begin to see what you mean," admitted
Fiennes; " but even if a sword-stick was used, I
have no guess of how it was used."

" I had a sort of guess," said Father Brown,
“ right at the beginning when you said the word
summer-house. And another when you said that
Druce wore a white coat. As long as everybody
was looking for a short dagger, nobody thought of
it; but if we admit a rather long blade like a rapier,
it’s not so impossible.”

He was leaning back, looking at the ceiling,
and began like one going back to his own first
thoughts and fundamentals.

All that discussion about detective stories
like the Yellow Room, about a man found dead

too



The Oracle of the Dog

in sealed chambers which no one could enter) does
not apply to the present case, because it is a summer-
house. When we talk of a Yellow Room, or any
room, we imply walls that arc really homogeneous
and impenetrable. But a summer-house is not
made like that; it is often made, as it was in this case,
of closely interlaced but still separate boughs and
strips of wood, in which there are chinks here and
there. There was one of them just behind Druce’s
back as he sat in his chair up against the wall.
But just as the room was a summer-house, so the
chair was a basket-chair. That also was a lattice
of loopholes. Lastly, the summer-house was close
up under the hedge ; and you have just told me that
it was really a thin hedge. A man standing out-
side it could easily see, amid a network of twigs
and branches and canes, one white spot of the
Colonel’s coat as plain as the white of a target.

“ Now, you left the geography a little vague;
but it was possible to put two and two together.
You said the Rock of Fortune was not really high;
but you also said it could be seen dominating the
garden like a mountain-peak. In other words,
it was very near the end of the garden, though your
walk had taken you a long way round to it. Also,
it isn’t likely the young lady really howled so as to
be heard half a mile. She gave an ordinary in-
voluntary cry, and yet you heard it on the shore.
And among other interesting things that you tdd

lOt



The Incredulity of Father Brown

me, may I remind you that you said Harry Druce
had fallen behind to light his pipe under a hedge.”

Fiennes shuddered slightly. ” You mean he
drew his blade there and sent it through the hedge
at the white spot. But surely it was a very odd
chance and a very sudden choice. Besides, he
couldn’t be certain the old man’s money had passed
to him, and as a fact it hadn’t.”

Father Brown’s face became animated.

” You misunderstand the man’s character,”
he said, as if he himself had known the man all his
life. “ A curious but not unknown type of char-
acter. If he had really kuown the money would come
to him, I seriously believe he wouldn’t have done it*
He would have seen it as the dirty thing it was.”

” Isn’t that rather paradoxical ? ” asked the other.

“ This man was a gambler,” said the priest,
” and a man in disgrace for having taken ris^ and
anticipated orders. It was probably for something
pretty unscrupulous, for every imperial police is
more like a Russian secret police than we like to
think. But he had gone beyond the line and &iled.
Now, the temptation of that type of man is to do
a mad thing precisely because the risk will be won-
derful in retrospect. ■ He wants to say, * Nobody but
I could have seized that chance or seen that it was
then or never. What a wild and wonderful gueae
it was, when I put all those things together; Donald
in disgrace; and the lawyet being sent for; and



The Oracle of the Dog

Herbert and I sent for at the same time— and then
nothing more but the way the old man grinned at
me and shook hands. Anybody would say I was
mad to risk it; but that is how fortunes are made,
by the man mad enough to have a little foresight.’
In short, it is the vanity of guessing. It is the
megalomania of the gambler. The more incon-
gruous the coincidence, the more instantaneous
the decision, the more likely he is to snatch the
chance. The accident, the very triviality, of the
white speck and the hole in the hedge intoxicated
him like a vision of the world’s desire. Nobody
clever enough to see such a combination of accidraits
could be cowardly enough not to use them I Tha|^
is how the devil talks to the gambler. But the devil
himself would hardly have induced that unhappy
man to go down in a dull, deliberate way and Idll
an old uncle from whom he’d always had expecta-
tions. It would be too respectable.”

He paused a moment; and then went on with
a certain quiet emphasis.

” And now try to call up the scene, even as you
saw it yourself. As he stood there, dizzy with his
diabolical (^portunity, he looked up and saw that
strange outline that might have been the image
of Us own tottering soul; the one great crag pois^
perilously on the other like a pyramid on its point
and remembered that it was called the Ro<^ of
Portune. Can you guess how such a man at such

103



The Incredulity of Father Brown

a moment would read such a' signal ? I think it
strung him up to action and even to vigilance.
He who would be a tower must not fear to be a
toppling tower. Anyhow, he acted; his next diffi-
culty was to cover his tracks. To be found with a
sword-stick, let alone a blood-stained sword-stick,
would be fatal in the search that was certain to follow.
If he left it anywhere, it would be found and probably
traced. Even if he threw it into the sea the action
might be noticed, and thought noticeable — ^unless
indeed he could think of some more natural way of
covering the action. As you know, he did think
of one, and a very good one. Being the only one
of you with a watch, he told you it was not yet time
to return, strolled a little farther and started the
game of throwing in sticks for the retriever. But
how his eyes must have rolled darkly over all that
desolate seashore before they alighted on the dog 1 ”

Fiennes nodded, gazing thoughtfully into space.
His mind seemed to have drifted back to a less
practical part of the narrative.

“ It's queer,” he said, ” that the dog really
was in the story after all.”

*' The dog could almost have told you the
story, if he could talk,” said the priest. " All I
Oompliun of is that because he couldn’t talk, you
made up his story f<M: him, and made him talk with
the tongues of men and angels. It's part of some-
thing I’ve noticed more and more in the modem

104



The Oracle of the Dog

world, appearing m all sorts of newspaper rumours
and conversational catchwords ; something that’s
arbitrary without being ^authoritative. People
readily swallow the untested claims of this, that,
or the other. It’s drowning all your old rationalism
and scepticism, it’s coming in like a sea; and the
name of it is superstition.” He stood up abruptly,
his face heavy with a sort of frown, and went on
talking almost as if he were alone. ” It’s the first
effect of not beliering in God that you lose your
common sense, and can’t see things as they are.
Anything that anybody talks about, and says there’s
a good deal in it, extends itself indefinitely like a
vista in a nightmare. And a dog is an omen and
a cat is a mystery and a pig is a mascot and a beetle
is a scarab, calling up all the menagerie of poly*
theism from Egypt and old India; Dog Anubis and
great green-eyed Pasht and all the holy howling
Bulls of Bashan; reeling back to the bestial gods of
the beginning, escaping into elephants and snakes
and crocodiles; and all because you are frightened
of four words : * He was made Man.’ ”

The young man got up with a little embarrass-
ment, almost as if he had overheard a soliloquy.
He called to the dog and left the room with vague
but breezy fiuewells. But he had to call the dog
twice, for the dog had remained behind quite
motionless for a moment, looking up steadily at
Father Brown as the wolf kxdced at St. Francis.

■ 105



IV

THE MIRACLE OF MOON CRESCENT

Mook Crescent was meant in a sense to be as
romantic as its name; and the things that happened
there were romantic enough in their way. At least
it had been an expression of that genuine element of
sentiment— historic and almost heroic — ^which man-
ages to remain side by side with commercialism in
the elder cities on the eastern coast of America. It
was originally a curve of classical architecture really
recalling that eighteenth-century atmosphere in
which men like Washington and J^erson had
seemed to be all the more republicans for being
aristocrats. Travellers faced with the recurrent
query of what they thought of our city were under-
stood to be specially answerable for what they
thought of our Moon Crescent. The very contrasts
that omfuse its ori^nal harmony were characteristic
of its survival. At one extremity or horn of the
crescent its last windows looked over an enclosure
Uke a strip of a gentleman's park, with trees and
hedges as formal u a Qiwen Anne garden. But
immediately round the comer, the odaer windowB»
even of the same rooms, or rather ** apartments^"

ia6



The Miracle of Moon CreseeM

looked out on the blank, tmsighdy amll of a huge
watehouse attached to some ugly industry, t^e
apartments of Moon Crescent itself were at that end
remodelled on the monotonous pattern of an Ameri-
can hotel, and rose to a height, which, though lower
than the colossal warehouse, would have been called
a skyscraper in London. But the colonnade that ran
round the whole frontage upon the street had a grey
and weather-stuned stateliness suggesting that the
ghosts of the Fathers of the Republic might still be
walking to and fix> in it. The insides of the rooms,
however, were as neat and new as the last New Toric
fittings could make them, especially at the northern
end between the neat garden and the blank ware-
house wall. They were a system of very small flats,
as we 8houl#say in England, each consisting of a
sitting-room,* bedroom, and bathroom, as identical as
the hun<hred cells of a hive. In one of these the cele-
brated Warren Wynd sat at his desk sorting letters
and scattering orders with wonderful rapidity and
eaactitude. He could only be compared to a tidy
whiriwind.

Wanen Wynd was a very little man with loose
grey hair and a pointed beard, seemingly iitail but
fie^ active. He had very wonderful eyes, brighter
than stus and stronger than magnets, whidi
h0d^ who had ever seen them could easily fluget
And iadeed in his work as a tefimner and rrgwlatnr
of aMf good works he had showiuwt lesit that he



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Had a pair of eyes in his head. All sorts of stories
and even legends were told of the miractilous
rapidity with which he could form a sound judg-
ment, especially of human character. It was said
that he selected the wife who worked with him so
long in so charitable a fashion, by picking her out of
a whole regiment of women in uniform marching
past at some official celebration, some said of the
Girl Gxiides and some of the Women Police. An-
other story was told of how three tramps, indistin-
guishable from each other in their community of
filth and rags, had presented themselves before him
asking for charity. Without a moment’s hesitation
he had sent one of them to a particular hospital
devoted to a certain nervous disorder, had recom-
mended the second to an inebriates’ home, and had
engaged the third at a handsome salary as his own
private servant, a position which he fiiled success-
fully for years afterwards. There were, of course,
the inevitable anecdotes of his prompt criticisms and
curt repartees when brought in contact with Roose-
velt, with Henry Ford, and with Mrs. Asquith and
all other persons with whom an American public
man ought to have a historic interview, if only in the
newspapers. Certainly he was not likely to be over-
awed by such personages; and at the moment here in
question he continued very calmly his centrifugal
whirl of papers, though the man confronting hi™
was a personage of almost equal importance.

loB



The Miracle of Moon Cresa^hm

Silas T. Vandam, the millionaire and oil magnate,
was a lean man with a long, yellow face and blue-
black hair, colours which were the less conspicuous
yet somehow the more sinister because his face and
figure showed dark against the window and the
white warehouse wall outside it; he was buttoned up
tight in an elegant overcoat with strips of astrachan.
The eager face and brilliant eyes of Wynd, on the
other hand, were in the full light from the other
window overlooking the little garden, for his chair
and desk stood facing it; and though the face was
preoccupied, it did not seem unduly preoccupied
about the millionaire. Wynd’s valet or pei^nal
servant, a big, powerful man with flat fiur hair, was
standing behind his master’s desk holding a sheaf of
letters; and Wynd’s private secretary, a neat, red-
haired youth with a sharp &ce, had his hand already
on the door handle, as if guessing some ptirpose or
obeying some gesture of his employer. The room,
was not only neat but austere to the point of empti-
ness; for Wynd, with characteristic thoroughness,
had rented the whole floor above, and turned it into
a loft or storeroom, where all his other papers and
possessions were stacked in boxes and corded
bales.

"Give these to the floor-derk, Wilson," said
Wynd to the servant holding the letters, " and then
get me foe pamphlet on the Minneapolis Night
Clubs; you’ll find it in the bundle marked G. 1

109



The Incredulity of Father Brown

shall want it in half an hour, but don’t distiirb me
till then. Well, Mr. Vandam, I think your pro-
position sounds very promising; but I can’t give a
final answer till I’ve seen the report. It ought to
reach me to-morrow afternoon, and I’ll 'phone you
at once. I’m sorry I can’t say anything more
definite just now.”

Mr. Vandam seemed to feel that this was some-
thing like a polite dismissal; and his sallow, saturnine
face suggested that he found a certain irony in the
fiict.

" Well, I suppose I must be going,” he said.

“ Very good of you to call, Mr. Vandam,” said
Wynd, politely ; ” you will excuse my not coming
out, as I’ve something here I must fix at once.
Fenner,” he added to the secretary, “ show Mr.
Vandam to his car, and don’t come back again for
half an hour. I’ve something here I want to work
out by myself; after that I shall want you.”

The three men went out into the hallway to-*
gether, closing the door behind them. The big
servant, Wilson, was turning down the hallway in
the direction of the floor-clerk and the other two
moving in the opposite direction towarcb the lift;
for Wynd’s apartment was high up on the fourteenth
floor. They had hardly gone a yard from the closed
door when they became conscious that the cmridor
was filled with a marching and even magnificent
figure. The man was voy tall and broad-slu^deved,

IIO



The Miracle of Moon Cresceid

his bulk being the more conspicuous for being ckd
in white or a light grey that looked like i^ with a
very wide white panama hat and an almost equally
wide fringe or halo of almost equally white hair. Srt
in this aureole his face was strong and handsomei
like that of a Roman emperor, save that there was
something more than boyish, something a little
childish, about the brightness of his eyes and the
beatitude of his smile.

“ Mr. Warren Wynd in ? ” he asked, in hearty
tones.

** Mr. Warren Wynd is engaged," said Fenner;
‘ he must not be disturbed on any account. ' I may
say I’m his secretary and can take any message."

" Mr. Warren Wynd is not at home to the Pope
or the Crowned Heads," said Vandam; the oil
magnate, with sour satire. “ Mr. Warren Wynd a
mighty particular. I went in there to hand him over
a trifle of twenty thousand dollars on certain con-
ditions; and he told me to call again like as if I was
a call-boy."

" It’s a fine thing to be a boy," said the stranger,
** and a finer to have a call; and I’ve got a call he’s
just got to listen to. It’s a call out of the great good
country out West where the real American is being
made while you’re all snoring. Just tell him that
Art Alboin ^ Oklahoma City lias come to convert
him."

** 1 tdB you nobo<fy can see hina," sud the red*

III



The Incredulity of Father Brown

haired secretary sharply. “ He' has ^ven orders
that he is not to be disturbed for half an hour.”

” You folks'down East are all against being dis<
turbedy” said the breezy Mr. Alboin, “ but I calcu>
late there’s a big breeze getting up in the 'West that
will have to disturb you. He’s been figuring out
how much money must go to this and that stuffy old
religion; but I tell you any scheme that leaves out
the new Great Spirit movement in Texas and Okla-
homa, is leaving out the religion of the future.”

” Oh, I’ve sized up those religions of the future,”
said the millionaire, contemptuously. ” I’ve been
through them with a tooth-comb; and they’re as
mangy as yellow dog. There was that woman called
herself Sophia; ought to have called herself Sapphira,
I reckon. Just a plum fraud. Strings tied to all the
tables and tambourines. Then there were the In-
visible Life bunch; said they could vanish when they
liked, and they did vanish, too, and a hundred thou-
sand of my dollars vanished with them. I knew
Jupiter Jesus out in Denver; saw him for weeks on
end; and he was just a common crook. So was the
Patagonian Prophet; you bet he’s made a bolt for
Patagonia. No, I’m through with all diat ; from
now on I only believe what I see. I believe they
call it being an atheist.”

” I guess you got me wrong,” said the man from
Oklahoma, almost eagerly. *' I guess I’m as much
of an athdst as you are. No supernatural or supers

I IS



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

stitious stuff in oiu* movement; just plain science.
The only real right science is just health; and the
only real right health is just breathing. Fill your
lungs with the wide air of the prairie and you could
blow all your old eastern cities into the sea. You
could just puff away their biggest men like thistle-
down. That’s what we do in the new movement out
home: we breathe. We don’t pray; we breathe.”

” Well, I suppose you do,” said the secretary,
wearily; he had a keen, intelligent face which could
hardly conceal the weariness ; but he had listened to
the two monologues with the admirable patience and
politeness (so much in contrast with the legends of
impatience and insolence) with which such mono-
logues are listened to in America.

” Nothing supernatural,” continued Alboin,
“just the great natural fact behind all the super-
natural fancies. What did the Jews want with a God
except to breathe into man’s nostrils the breath of
life i We do the breathing into our own nostrils out
in Oklahoma. What’s the meaning of the very
word Spirit ? It’s just the Greek for breathing
exercises. Life, progress, prophecy; it’s all breath.”

“ Some would allow it’s all vdnd," said Vandam;
” but I’m glad you’ve got rid of the divinity stunt,
anyhow.”

The keen hce of the secretary, rather pale
against his red hsur, showed a flicker of some odd
feeling suggestive of a secret bitterness.

113



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ I’m not glad,” he said, “ I’m just sure. You
seem to like being atheists; so you may be just
believing what you like to believe. But I wish to
God there were a God; and there ain’t. It’s just
my luck.”

Without a sound or stir they all became almost
creepily conscious at this moment that the group,
halted outside Wynd’s door, had silently grown
from three figures to four. How long the fourth
figure had stood there none of the earnest disputants
could tell, but he had every appearance of waiting
respectfully and even timidly for the opportunity to
say something urgent. But to their nervous sensi-
bility he seemed to have sprung up suddenly and
silently like a mushroom. And indeed, he looked
rather like a big, black mushroom, for he was quite
short and his small, stumpy figure was eclipsed by
his big, black clerical hat; the resemblance might
have been more complete if mushrooms were in the
habit of carrying umbrellas, even of a shabby and
shapeless sort.

Fenner, the secretary, was conscious of a curious
additional surprise at recognizing the figure of a
priest; but when the priest turned up a round fiice
under the round hat and innocently asked for Mr*
Warren Wynd, he gave the regular negative answer
rather more curtly than before. But the priest stood
his ground.

” I do really want to see Mr. Wynd,” he sakL
*«4



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

** It seems odd, but that’s exactly what I do want to
do. I don’t want to speak to him. I just want to see
him. I just want to see if he’s there to be seen.”

” Well, I tell you he’s there and can’t be seen,”
said Fenner, with increasing annoyance. ” What do
you mean by saying you want to see if he’s there to
be seen ? Of course he’s there. We all left him
there five minutes ago and we’ve stood outside this
door ever since.”

” Well, I want to see if he’s all right,” said the
priest.

“ Why ? ” demanded the secretary, in ezaspera<
tion.

” Because I have serious, I might say solemn,
reasons,” said the cleric, gravely, ” for doubting
whether he is all right.”

” Oh, Lo^I ” cried Vandam, in a sort of fury,
“ not more superstitions.”

” I see I shall have to give my reasons,” observed
the little cleric, gravely. ” I suppose I can’t expect
you even to let me look through the crack of a door
till I tell you the whole story.”

He was silent a moment as in reflection, and then
went on without noticing the wondering fisces around
him. ” I was walking outside along the front of the
colonnade sriien I saw a very ragged man running
hard round the comer at the end of the crescoit. He
came pounding along the pavement towards me,
Kvealing a great, raw-boned figure and a face I knew.

• *5



The Incredulity of Father Brown

It was the face of a wild Irish fellow I once helped a
little; I will not tell you his name. When he saw me
he staggered, calling me by mine and saying, ‘ Saints
alive, it’s Father Brown ; you’re the only man whose
face could frighten me to-day.’ I knew he meant
he’d been doing some wild thing or other, and I don’t
think my face frightened him much, for he was soon
telling me about it. And a very strange thing it was.
He asked me if 1 knew Warren Wynd, and I said no,
though I knew he lived near the top of these flats.
He said, ‘ That’s a man who thinks he’s a saint of
God; but if he knew what I was saying of him he
should be ready to hang himself.’ And he repeated
hysterically more than once, ‘ Yes, ready to hang
himself.’ I asked him if he’d done any harm to
Wynd and his answer was rather a queer one. He
said: * I took a pistol and 1 loaded it with neither shot
nor slug, but only with a curse.’ As far as I could
make out, all he had done was to go down that little
alley between this building and the big warehouse,
with an old pistol loaded with a blank charge, and
merely fire it against the wall, as if that would bring
down the building. ' But as I did it,’ he said, * I
cursed him with the great curse, that the justice of
God should take him by the hur and the vengeance
of hell by the heels, and he should be torn asunder
like Judu and the world know him no more.’ Well)
it doesn’t matter now what else I said to the poor,
crazy fellow; he went away quieted down a little, and

Ii6



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

I went round to the back of the building to inspect.
And sure enough, in the little alley at the foot of this
wall there lay a rusty antiquated pistol; I know
enough about pistols to know it had been loaded only
with a little powder; there were the black marks of
powder and smoke on the wall, and even the mark of
the muzzle, but not even a dent of any bullet. He
had left no trace of destruction; he had left no trace
of anything, except those black marks and that black
curse he had hurled into heaven. So I came back
here to ask for this Warren Wynd and find out if
he’s all right.”

Fenner the secretary laughed. “ I cah soon
settle that difficulty for you. I assure you he’s quite
all right; we left him writing at his desk only a few
minutes ago. He was alone in his flat; it’s a hun-
dred feet up from the street, and so placed that no
shot could have reached him, even if your friend
hadn’t fired blank. There’s no other entrance to
this place but this door, and we’ve been standing
outsit it ever since.”

“ All the same,” said Father Brown, gravely>
” 1 should like to look in and see.”

“ Well, you can’t,” retorted the other. ” Good
Lord, don’t tell me you think anything of the curse.”

” You forget,” said the millionaire, mth a slight
sneer, “ the reverend gentleman’s whole business is
blessings and cursings. Come, sir, if he’s been
cursed to hell, why don’t you bless him back again ?

••7



The Incredulity of Father Brown

What's the good of your blessingi if they can't beat
an Irish larrykin's curse."

*' Does anybody believe such things now ? "
protested the Westerner.

' " Father Brown believes a good number of
things, I take it," said Vandam, whose temper was
suffering from the past snub and the present bicker-
ing. “ Father Brown believes a hermit crossed a
river on a crocodile conjured out of nowhere, and
then he told the crocodile to die, and it sure did.
Father Brown believes that some blessed saint or
other died, and had his dead body turned into three
dead bodies, to be served out to three parishes that
were all bent on figuring as his home-town. Father
Brown believes that a saint hung his cloak on a sun-
beam, and another used his for a boat to cross the
Atlantic. Father Brown believes the holy donkey
had six legs and the house at Lorretto flew through
the air. He believes in hundreds of stone virgins
winking and weeping all day long. It's nothing to
him to believe that a man might escape through the
keyhole or vanish out of a locked room. 1 reckon he
doesn't take much stock in the laws of nature."

** Anyhow, I have to take stock in the laws of
Warren Wyn^" said the secretary, wearily, “ and
it's his rule that he's to be left alone when he says so.
Wilson will tell you just the same," for the large
servant who had been sent for the pamphlet, passed
pladdly down the corridor even as be spoke, carrying

Ii8



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

the pamphlet, but serenely passing the door. “ He'll
go and sit on the bench by the floor-clerk and twiddle
his thumbs till he's wanted; but he won't go in be-
fore then; and nor will I. I reckon we both know
wluch side our bread is buttered; and it'd take a
good many of Father Brown's saints and angels to
make us forget it."

" As for saints and angels——" began the priest.

" It’s all nonsense," repeated Fenner. " 1 don’t
want to say anything offensive, but that sort of thing
may be very well for crypts and cloisters and all sorts
of moonshiny places. But ghosts can't get through a
closed door in an American hotel."

" But men can open a door, even in an Ameri-
can hotel,” replied Father Brown, patiently. " And
it seems to me the simplest thing would be to
open it."

" It would be simple enough to lose me my
job," answered the secretary, “ and Warren Wynd
doesn’t like his secretaries so simple as that. Not
simple enough to believe in the sort of fairy tales you
seem to believe in."

“ Wdl,” said the priest gravely, “ it is true
enough that I believe in a good many things that you
probably don't. But it would take a considerable
time to explain all the things I believe in, and all the
reasons I hxw for thinking I’m right. It would take
about two seconds to open that d^ and prove I am
wrong."


119



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Something in the phrase seemed to please the
more wild and restless spirit of the man from the
West.

“ ril allow I’d love to prove you wrong,” said
Alboin, striding suddenly past them, ” and I will.”

He threw open the door of the flat and looked in.
The first glimpse showed that Warren Wynd’s chair
^ was empty. The second glance showed that bis
room was empty also.

Fenner, electrified with energy in his turn,
dashed past the other into the apartment.

“ He’s in his bedroom,” he said curtly, “ he
must be.”

As he disappeared into the inner chamber the
other men stood in the empty outer room staring
about them. The severity and simplicity of its
fittings, which had already been noted, returned on
them with a rigid challenge. Certainly in this room
there was no question of hiding a mouse, let alone
a man. There were no curtains and, what is rare in
American arrangements, no cupboards. Even the
desk was no more than a plain table with a shallow
drawer and a tilted lid. The chairs were hard and
high-backed skeletons. A moment after the tecre-
taty reappeared at the inner door, having searched
the two inner rooms. A staring negation stood in
his eyes, and his mouth seemed to move in a meduuti-
cal detachment from it as he said sharply : ” He
didn’t come out through here ? ”



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

Somehow the others did not even think it
necessary to answer that negation in the negative.
Their minds had come up against something like the
blank wall of the warehouse that stared in at the
opposite window, gradually turning from white to
grey as dusk slowly descended with the advancing
afternoon. Vandam walked over to the window>«ill
against which he had leant half an hour before and
looked out of the open window. There was no pipe
or fire-escape, no shelf or foothold of any kind on the
sheer fall to the little by-street below, there was
nothing on the similar expanse of wall tluit rose
many stories above. There was even less variation
on the other side of the street; there was nothing
whatever but the wearisome expanse of whitewashed
wall. He peered downwards, as if expecting to see
the vanished philanthropist lying in a suicidal wreck
on the path. He could see nothing but one small
dark object which, though diminished by distance,
might well be the pistol that the priest had found
lying there. Meanwhile, Fenner had walked to the
other window, which looked from a wall equally
blank and inaccessible, but looking out over a small
ornamental park inst^ of a side street. Here a
dump of trees interrupted the actual view cS the
ground ; but they reached but a little way the huge
human diff. Both turned back into tiie room and
freed each other m the gathering twilight^ where tiw
last silver gleams of daylight on the shiny tops of

t lai



The Incredulity of Father Brown

desks and tables were rapidly turning grey. As if
the twilight itself irritated him, Fenner touched the
switch and the scene sprang into the startling dis-
tinctness of electric light.

“ As you said just now,*’ said Vandam grimly,
“ there’s no shot from down there could hit him,
even if there was a shot in the gun. But even if he
was hit with a bullet he wouldn’t have just burst like
a bubble.”

The secretary, who was paler than ever, glanced
irritably at the bilious visage of the millionaire.

“What’s got you started on those morbid
' notions ? Whose talking about bullets and bubbles?
Why shouldn’t he be alive ? ”

“ Why not indeed ? ” replied Vandam
smoothly. “ If you’ll tell me where he is. I’ll tell
you how he got there.”

After a pause the secretary muttered, rather
sufidly, “ I suppose you’re right. We’re right up
against the very thing we were talking about, k’d
be a queer thing if you or I ever came to think there
was anything in cursing. But who could have
harmed Wynd shut up in here ? ”

Mr. Alboin, of Oklahoma, had been standing
rather astraddle in the middle of the room, his white,
hairy halo as well as his round eyes seeming to
radiate astonishment At this point he said, ab-
stractedly, with sometlung of the irrelevant impu-
dence of an tmjMttarrMt :

iss



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

“ You didn’t cotton to him much, did you,
Mr. Vandam ? ”

Mr. Vandam’s long yellow face seemed to grow
longer as it grew more sinister, while he smiled and
answered quietly:

“ If it comes to these coincidences, it was you, I
think who said that a wind from the West would
blow away our big men like thistledown.”

” I know I said it would,” said the Westerner,
with candour ; “ but all the same, how the devil
could it ? ”

The silence was broken by Fenner saying with
an abruptness amounting to violence:

” There’s only one thing to say about this affair.
It simply hasn’t happened. It can’t have happened.”

** Oh, yes,” said Father Brown out of the omier,
“ it has happened all right.”

They all jumped; for the truth was they had all
forgotten the insignificant little man who had
"briginally induced them to open the door. And the
ftcovery of memory went with a sharp reversal of
mood; it came back to them with a rush that th^
had all dismissed him as a superstitious dreamer tor
even hinting at the very thing that had since hap-
pened before their eyes.

” Snakes! ” cried the impetuous Westerner, like
one speaking before he could stop himself. ** Sup-
pose there were something in after all I ”

” 1 must confess,” said Fenner, fiwwning at die

MS



The Incredulity of Father Brown

table, '* that his reverence’s anticipations were
apparently well founded. I don’t know whether he
has anything else to tell us.”

*' He might possibly tell us,” said Vandam,
sardonically, ” what the devil we are to do now.”

The little priest seemed to accept the position in
a modest, but matter-of-fact manner. ” The only
thing I can think of,” he said, “ is first to tell the
authorities of this place, and then to see if there were
any more traces of my man who let off the pistol.
He vanished round the other end of the Crescent
where the little garden is. There are seats there, and
it’s a favourite place for tramps.”

Direct consultations with the headquarters of the
hotel, leading to indirect consultations with the
authorities of the police, occupied them for a con-
siderable time; and it was already nightfall when they
went out under the long, classical curve of the
colonnade. The crescent looked as cold and hollow
as the moon after which it was named, and the
moon itself was rising luminous but spectral, be-
hind the black tree-tops when they turned the corner
by the little public garden. Night veiled much of
what was merely urban and artificial about the place ;
and as they melted into the shadows of the trees they
had a strange feeling of having suddenly travdled
many hundred miles from their homes. When they
had walked in silence for a little, Alboin, who had
something demental about lum, suddenly exploded.



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

“ I give up," he cried; " I hand b my checks. 1
never thought I should come to such things; but
what happens when the things come to you ? I beg
your pardon, Father Brown; I reckon 1*11 just come
across, so far as you and yotir fairy-tales are con-
cerned. After this, it’s me for the &iry-tales. Why,
you said yourself, Mr. Vandam, that you’re an
atheist and only believe what you see. Well, what
was it you did see ? Or rather, what was it you
didn’t see ? ’’

" 1 know,’’ said Vandam and nodded b a gloomy
fashion.

“ Oh, it’s partly all this moon and trees that get
on one’s nerves," said Fenner obstinately. ' " Trees
always look queer by moonlight, with their branches
crawling about. Look at that——’’

“ Yes," said Father Brown, standbg sdll and
peering at the moon through a tangle of trees.
" That’s a very queer branch up there."

When he spoke again he only said :

" I thought it was a broken branch."

But this time there was a catch b his voice that
unaccountably turned his hearers cold. Somethbg
that looked rather like a dead branch was certably
dependent b a limp fashbn from the tree that
showed dark agabst the moon; but it was not a dead
branch. When they came close to it to see what it
was, Fenner sprang away agab with a ringing oath.
Then he ran in agab and loosened a rope fiom the

»s



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

neck of a dingjr litde body dangling with drooping
plumes of grey hair. Somehow he knew that the
body was a dead body before he managed to take it
down from the tree. A very long coil of rope was
wrapped round and round the branches, and a com-
paratively short length of it hung from the fork of
the branch to the body. A large garden tub was
rolled a yard or so from under the feet, like the stool
kicked away from the feet of a suicide.

“ Oh my God,” said Alboin, so that it seemed
as much a prayer as an oath. ” What was it that
man said about him ? — * If he knew, he would be
ready to hang himself.* Wasn’t that what he said.
Father Brown ? ”

“ Yes,” said Father Brown.

“ Well,” said Vandam in a hollow voice, “ I
never thought to see or say such a thing. But what
can one say except that the curse has worked ? ”
Fenner was standing with hands covering his
face; and the priest laid a hand on his arm and said,
gendy, '* Were you very fond of him ? ”

The secreta^ droppe^is hands and his wlute
face was ghasdy under the moon.

'* I hated him like hell,” he said ; ” and if he died
by a curse it might have been mine.”

The pressure of the priest’s hand on his arm
tightened; and the priest said, with an earnestness he
had hardly yet shown:

** It wasn’t your curse ; pray be comforted.”



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

The police of the district had considerable difi-
culty in dealing with the four witnesses who were
involved in the case. All of them were reputable,
and even reliable people in the ordinary sense; and
one of them was a person of considerable power and
importance; Silas Vandam of the Oil Trust. The
first police officer who tried to express scepticism
about his story struck sparks from the steel of that
magnate’s mind very rapidly indeed.

’* Don’t you talk to me about sticking to the
facts,” said the millionaire with asperity. ” I’ve
stuck to a good many facts before you were born, and
a few of the facts have stuck to me. I’ll gWp you the
facts all right if you’ve got the sense to take ’em down
correctly.”

The policeman in question was yotithful and
subordinate, and had a hazy idea that the million*
aire was too political to be treated as an ordinary
citizen; so he passed him and his companions on to
a more stolid superior, one Inspector Collins, a
grizzled man with a grimly comfortable way of talh^
ing; as one who was genial but would stand no
nonsense.

“Well, wdl, he said, looking at the three
figures before him with tsrinkling eyes, “ this seems
to be a funny sort of a tale.”

Fadier Brown* had already gone about 'his
daily business; but Silas Vandam had su^Mndefl
even the gigantic business of the soarkels for a*

*n



The Incredulity of Father Brown

hour or so to testify to his remarkable experience.
Fenner’s business as secretary had ceased in a
sense with his employer’s life; and the great Art
Alboin, having no business in New York or any-
where else, except the spreading of the Breath of
Life or religion of the Great Spirit, had nothing to
draw him away at the moment from the immediate
affair. So they stood in a row in the inspector’s
office, prepared to corroborate each other.

“ Now I’d better tell you to start with,” said the
inspector <;heerfully, ” that it’s no good for anybody
to come to me with any miraculous stuff. I’m a
practical man and a policeman, and that sort of thing
is all very well for priests and parsons. This priest
of yours seems to have got you all worked up about
some story of a dreadful death and judgment; but
I’m going to leave him and his religion out of it
altogether. If Wynd came out of that room, some-
body let him out. And if Wynd was found hanging
on that tree, somebody hung him there.”

** Quite so,” said Fenner ; ” but as our evidence
is that nobody let him out, the question is how could
anybody have hung him there ? ”

” How could anybody have a nose on his face ? ”
asked the inspector. ” He had a nose on his face
and he had a noose roiuid his neck. Those are facts ;
and as I say, I’m a practical man and go by the fficts.
It can’t have been done by a miracle, so it must have
been done by a man.”



The Miracle of Moon Creicent

Alboin had been standing rather in the back-
ground; and indeed, his broad figure seemed to form
a natural background to the leaner and more viva-
cious men in front of him. His white head was
bowed with a certain abstraction ; but as the inspec-
tor said the last sentence, he lifted it, shaking his
hoary mane in a leonine fashion, and looking dazed
but awakened. He moved forward into the centre
of the group; and they had a vague feeling that he
was even vaster than before. They had been only
too prone to take him for a fool or a mountebank;
but he was not altogether wrong when he said that
there was in him a certain depth of lungs and lifei
like a west wind stored up in its strength, which
might some day puff lighter things away.

“ So you’re a practical man, Mr. G>llins,” he
said, in a voice at once soft and heavy. " It must be
the second or third time you’ve mentioned in this
little conversation that you are a practical man; so I
can’t be mistaken about that. And a very interesting
little fisct it is for anybody engaged in writing your
life, letters, and table-talk, with portrait at the age of
five, daguerreotype of your grandmother and views
the old home-town; and I’m sure your biographer
won’t forget to mention it, along with the fiu:t that
you had a pug nose with a pimple on it, and were
nearly too fat to walk. And as you’re a practical
man, perhaps you would just go on practinng till
you’ve brought Warren Wynd to Ufe again, and

**9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

found out exacdy how a practical man gets through
a deal door. But I think you’ve got it wrong.
You’re not a practical man. You’re a practical joke ;
that’s what you are. The Almighty was having a bit
of fun with us when he thought of you.”

With a characteristic sense of drama he went
sailing towards the door before the astonished in-
spector could reply; and no after recriminations
could rob him of a certain appearance of triumph.

“ 1 think you were perfectly right,” said Fenner.
“ If those are practical men, give me priests.”

Another attempt was made to reach an official
version of the event, when the authorities fully
realized who were the backers of the story, and what
were the implications of it. Already it had broken
out in the Press in its most sensationally and even
shamelessly psychic form. Interviews with Vandam
on his marvellous adventure, articles about Father
Brown and his mystical intuitions, soon led those
who feel responsible for guiding the public, to wish
to guide it into a wiser channel. Next time the
inconvenient witnesses were approached in a more
indirect and tactful manner. They were told, almost
in an airy fashion, that Professor Vair was very much
interested in such abnormal experiences; was especi-
ally interested in their own astonishing case. Pro-
fessor Vair was a psychologist of great distinction;
he had been known to take a detached interest in
criminology; it was only some little time afterwards

•so



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

that they discovered that he was in any way con«
nected with the police.

Professor Vair was a courteous gentleman,
quietly dressed in pale grey clothes, with an artistic
tie and a fair, pointed beard; he looked more like a
landscape painter to anyone not acquainted with a
certain special type of don. He had an air not only
of courtesy, but of frankness.

“ Yes, yes, I know,” he said smiling ; “ I
can guess what you must have gone through. The
police do not shine in inquiries of a psychic sort, do
they ? Of course, dear old Collins said he only
wanted the facts. What an absurd blunder! In a
case of this kind we emphatically do not only want
the facts. It is even more essential to have the
fancies.”

” Do you mean ? ” asked Vandam gravely,
” that all that we call the facts were merely &ncies ? ”

” Not at all,” said the professor ; ” I only mean
that the police are stupid in thinking they can leave
out the psychological element in these things. Well,
of course, the psychological element is everything in
everything, though it is only just beginning to be
understood. To begin with, take the element called
personality. Now I have heard of this priest. Father
Brown, before; and he is one of the most renurkable
men of our time. Men of that sort cahy a sort ai
atmosphere with them; ud nobody knows how
much his nerves and even his very senses are

iji



The Incredulity of Father Brown

affected by it for the time being. People are
hypnotized — yes, hypnotized; for hypnotism, like
everything else, is a matter of degree; it enters
slightly into all daily conversation; it is not neces-
sarily conducted by a man in evening-dress on a
platform in a public hall. Father Brown’s religion
has always understood the psychology of atmo-
spheres, and knows how to appeal to everything
simultaneously; even, for instance, to the sense of
smell. It understands those curious effects produced
by music on animals and human beings; it can ”

" Hang if.” protested Fenner, “ you don’t think
he walked di^wn the corridor carrying a church
organ ? ”

” He knows better than to do that,” said Pro-
fessor Vair laughing. “ He knows how to concen-
trate the essence of all these spiritual sounds and
sights, and even smells, in a few restrained gestures;
in an art or school of manners. He could contrive so
to concentrate your minds on the supernatural by
his mere presence, that natural things slipped off
your min(k to \ieft and right unnoticed. Now you
know,” he proceeded with a return to cheerful good
sense, *' that the more we study it the more queer
the whole question of htunan evidence becomes.
There is not one man in twenty who really observes
things at all. There is not one man in a hundred
who observes them with real precision; certainly not
one in a hundred who can first observe, then remem-

• 3 *



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

ber and finally describe. Scientific experiments have
been made again and again showing that men under
a strain have thought a door was shut when it was
open, or open when it was shut. Men have differed
about the number of doors or windows in a wall just
in front of them. They have suffered optical
illusions in broad daylight. They have done this
even without the hypnotic effect of personality; but
here we have a very powerful and persuasive person-
ality bent upon fixing only one picture on your
minds; the picture of the wild Irish rebel shaking
his pistol at the sky and firing that vain volley, whose
echoes were the thunders of heaven.”

” Professor,” cried Fenner, “ I'd swear on my
deathbed that door never opened.”

” Recent experiments,” went on the Professor,
quietly, ” have suggested that our consciousness is
not continuous, but is a succession of very rapid
impressions like a cinema; it is possible that some-
body or something may, so to speak, slip in or out
between the scenes. It acts only in the instant while
the curtain is down. Probably the patter of con-
jurers and all forms of sleight of hand depend on
what we may call these black flashes of blindness
between the flashes of sight. Now this priest and
preacher of transcendental notions had filled you
with a transcendental imagery; the image of the
Celt like a Titan shaking the tower with his curse.
Probably he accompanied it with some slight but

*33



The Incredulity of Father Brown

compelling gesture, pointing your eyes and minds
in the direction of die unknown destroyer below.
Or perhaps something else happened, or somebody
else passed by.”

“ Wilson the servant,” grunted Alboin, ” went
down the hallway to wait on the bench, but I guess
he didn’t distract us much.”

“ You never know how much,” replied Vair;
“ it might have been that or more likely your eyes
following some gesture of the priest as he told his
tale of magic. It was in one of those black flashes
that Mr. Warren Wynd slipped out of his door and
went to his death. That is the most probable ex-
planation. It is an illustration of the new discovery.
The mind is not a continuous line, but rather a
dotted line.”

” Very dotted,” said Fenner feebly. ” Not to
say dotty.”

“ You don’t really believe,” asked Vair, “ that
your employer was shut up in a room like a box ? ”

“ It’s better than believing that I ought to be
shut up in a room like a padded cell,” answered
Fenner. “ That’s what I complain of in your sug-
gestions, professor. I’d as soon believe in a priest
vdio believes in a miracle, as disbelieve in any man
having any right to believe in a hct. The priest
tells me tluit a man can appeal to a God I know
nothing about, to avenge him by the laws of tome
lugher justice that I know nothing about. Thete’s

*34



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

nothing for me to say except that I know nothing
about it. But at least if the poor Paddy’s prayer and
pistol could be heard in a higher world, that higher
world might act in some way that seems odd to us.
But you ask me to disbelieve the facts of this world
as they appear to my own five wits. According to
you, a whole procession of Irishman carrying
blunderbusses may have walked through this room
while we were talking, so long as they took care to
tread on the blind spots in our minds. Miracles of
the monkish sort, like materializing a crocodile or
hanging a cloak on a sunbeam, seem quite sane
compared to you.”

” Oh, well,” said Professor Vair, rather curtly,
” if you are resolved to believe in your priest and his
miraculous Irishman, I can say no more. I’m
afraid you have not had an opportunity of studying
psychology.”

” No,” said Fenner dryly, ” but I’ve had an
opportunity of studying psychologists.”

And, bowing politely, he led his deputation out
of the room and did not speak till he got into the
street; then he addressed them rather explosively. *

” Raving lunatics 1 ” cried Fenner in a fume.
” W^t the devil do they think is to happen to the
world if nobody knows whether he’s seen anything
or not ? I wish I’d blown his silly head ofiF with a
blanlT charge, and then exphuned that I did it in a
Uind flash. Father down’s miracle may be miracu-

<S5



The Incredulity of Father Brown

lous or no, but he said it would happen and it did
happen. All these blasted cranks can do is to see a
thing happen and then say it didn’t. Look here, I
think we owe it to the padre to testify to his little
demonstration. We’re all sane, solid men who never
believed in anything. We weren’t drimk. We
weren’t dewut. It simply happened, just as he said
it would.”

I quite agree,” said the millionaire. “ It may
be the beginning of mighty big things in the
spiritual line; but anyhow, the man who’s in the
spiritual line himself. Father Brown, has certainly
scored over this business.”

A few days afterwards Father Brown received a
very polite note signed Silas T. Vandam, and asking
him if he could attend at a stated hour at the apart-
ment which was the scene of the disappearance in
order to take steps for the establishment of that
marvellous occurrence. The occmrence itself had
already begun to break out in the newspapers, and
was being taken up everywhere by the enthusiasts of
occultism. Father Brown saw the flaring posters
inscribed ” Suicide of Vanishing Man,” and ” Man’s
Curse Hangs Philanthropist,” as he passed towards
Moon Crescent and mounted the steps on the way
to the elevator. He found the little group much as
he left it, Vandam, Alboin, and the secretary; but
there was an entirely new respectfulness and even
reverence in their tone towards himself. They were

13&



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

standing by Wynd’s desk, on which lay a large paper
and writing materials, as they turned to greet him.

“ Father Brown," said the spokesman, who was'
the white-haired Westerner somewhat sobered with
his responsibility, " we asked you here in the first
place to ofifer our apologies and our thanks. We
recognize that it was you that spotted the spiritual
manifestation from the first. We were hard-shell
sceptics, all of us; but we realize now that a man
must break that shell to get at the great things behind
the world. You stand for those things; you stand
for that super-normal explanation of things; and we
have to hand it to you. And in the second place, we
feel that this document would not be complete with-
out your signature. We are notifying the exact
facts to the Psychical Research Society, because the
newspaper accounts are not what you might call
exact. W e've stated how the curse was spoken out in
the street; how the man was sealed up here in a room
like a box; how the curse dissolved him straight into
thin air, and in some unthinkable way materialized
him as a suicide hoisted on a gallows. That’s all we
can say about it; but all that we know, and have seen
with our own eyes. And as you were the first to
believe in the miracle, we all feel that you ought to be
the first to sign."

** No, really," said Father Brown, in embarrass-
ment. " I don’t think I should like to do that."

** You mean you’d rather not sign first ? *’

I 137



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ I mean I’d rather not sign at all,’* said Father
Brown, modestly. “ You see, it doesn’t quite do for
a man in my position to joke about miracles.”

” But it was you who said it was a miracle,” said
Alboin, staring.

“ I’m so sorry,” said Father Brown; “ I’m afraid
there’s some mistake. I don’t think I ever said it was
a miracle. All I said was that it might happen.
What you said was that it couldn’t happen, because it
would be a miracle if it did. And then it did. And
so you said it was a miracle. But I never said a word
about miracles or magic or anything of the sort from
beginning to end.”

” But 1 thought you believed in miracles,” broke
out the secretary.

“ Yes,” answered Father Brown, “ I believe in
miracles. 1 believe in man-eating tigers, but I don’t
see them running about everywhere. If I want any
miracles, I know where to get them.”

“ I can’t understand your taking this line.
Father Brown,” said Vandam, earnestly. “ It seems
so narrow; and you don’t look narrow to me, though
you are a parson. Don’t you see a miracle like this
will knock all materialism endways ? It will just tell
the whole world in big print that spiritual powers
can work and do work. You’ll be serving ndigion
as no parson ever served it yet.”

The priest had stiffened a little and seemed in
jome strange way clothed with unconsdous and



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

impersonal dignity, for all his stumpy figure.
** Well,*’ he said, “ you wouldn’t suggest I should
serve religion by what I know to be a lie ? I don’t
know precisely what you mean by the phrase; and,
to be quite candid. I’m not sure you do. Lying may
be serving religion; I’m sure it’s not serving God.
And since you are harping so insistently on what I
believe, wouldn’t it be well if you had some sort of
notion of what it is ? ”

“ I don’t think I quite understand,” observed
the millionaire, curiously.

” I don’t think you do,” said Father Brown,
with simplicity. ” You say this thing was dene by
spiritual powers. What spiritual powers ? You
don’t think the holy angels took him and hung him
on a garden tree, do you ? And as for the unholy
angels — ^no, no, no. The men who did this did a
wicked thing, but they went no fuather than their
own wickedness; they weren’t wicked enough to be
dealing with spiritual powers. I know something ,
about Satanism, for my sins; I’ve been forced to
know. I know what it is, what it practically always
is. It’s proud and it’s sly. It likes to be superior;
it loves to horrify the innocent with things half
understood, to nuJce children’s fiesh creep. That’s
why it’s so fond of mysteries and midations and
secret societies and all the rest of it. dts eyes are
turned inwards, and however grand and grave it may
kx>k, it’s always hiding a small, mad smile.” He

>99



The Incredulity of Father Brown

shuddered suddenly, as if caught in an icy draught
of air. “ Never mind about them; they’ve got
nothing to do with this, believe me. Do you think
that poor, wild Irishman of mine, who ran raving
down the street, who blurted out half of it when he
first saw my face, and ran away for fear he should
blurt out more, do you think Satan confides any
secrets to him ? I admit he joined m a plot, probably
in a plot with two other men worse than himself;
but for all that he was just in an everlasting rage
when he rushed down the lane and let off his pistol
and his curse.”

” But what on earth does all this mean ? ”
demanded Vandam. ” Letting off a toy pistol and a
twopenny curse wouldn’t do what was done, except
by a miracle. It wouldn’t make Wynd disappear
like a fairy. It wouldn’t make him reappear a
quarter of a mile away with a rope round his neck.”

” No,” said Father Brown, sharply, “ but what
would it do ? ”

"And still I don’t follow you,” said the mil-
lionaire gravely.

“ I say, what would it do ? ” repeated the priest,
showing, for the first time, a sort of animation
verging on annoyance. “ You keep on repeatiag
that a blank pistol-shot wouldn’t do this, and
wouldn’t do that; that if that was all, the murder
wouldn’t happen or the miracle wouldn’t happen.
It doesn’t seem to occur to you to ask what would

*4f>



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

happen. What would happen to you, if a lunatic
let off a firearm without rhyme or reason right under
your window ? What’s the very first thing that
would happen ? ”

Vandam looked thoughtful. “ I guess I should
look out of the window,” he said.

“ Yes,” said Father Brown, “ you’d look out of
the window. That’s the whole story. It’s a sad
story, but it’s finished now; and there were
extenuating circumstances.”

“ Why should looking out of the window hurt
him ? ” asked Alboin. ” He didn’t fall out, or he’d
have been found in the lane.”

“ No,” said Father Brown, in a low voice. “ He
didn’t fall. He rose.”

There was something in his voice like the groan
of a gong, a note of doom, but otherwise he went
on steadily :

“ He rose, but not on wings; not on the wings of
any holy or unholy angels. He rose at the end of a
rope, exactly as you saw him in the garden; a noose
dropped over the head the moment it was poked out
of the window. Don’t you remember Wilson, that
big servant of his, a man of huge strength, while
Wynd was the lightest of little shrimps ? Didn’t
Wilson go to the floor above to get a pamphlet, to a
room full of luggage corded in coils and colls of
rope ? Has Wilson been seen since that day ? I
fancy not.”



The Incredulity of Father Brown

" Do you mean,** asked the secretary, ** that
Wilson whisked him clean out of his own window
like a trout on a line ? **

” Yes,** said the other, “ and let him down again
out of the other window into the park, where the
third accomplice hooked him on to a tree. Remem-
ber the lane was always empty; remember the wall
opposite was quite blank; remember it was all over
in five minutes after the Irishman gave the signal
with the pistol. There were three of them in it, of
course; and 1 wonder whether you can all guess who
they were.**

They were all three staring at the plain, square
window and the blank, white wall beyond; and
nobody answered.

“ By the way,’* went on Father Brown, “ don’t
think I blame you for jumping to preternatural con-
clusions. The reason’s very simple, really. You
all swore you were hard-shelled materialists; and as
a matter of fact you were all balanced on the very
edge of belief — of belief in almost anything. There
are thousands balanced on it to-day; but it’s a sharp,
uncomfortable edge to sit on. You won’t rest till
you believe something; that’s why- Mr. Vandam
went through new religions with a tooth-comb and
Mr. Alboin quotes Scripture for his religion of
breathing exercises, and Mr. Fenner grumbles at the
very God he denies. That’s where you all split; it’s
natural to believe in the supernatural. It never feels

* 4 *



The Miracle of Moon Crescent

natural to accept only natural things. But though it
wanted only a touch to tip you into preternaturalism
about these things, these things really were only
natural things. They were not only natural, they
were almost unnaturally simple. I suppose there
never was quite so simple a story as this.*'

Fenner laughed and then looked puzzled. “ I
don’t understand one thing,” he said. ” If it was
Wilson, how did Wynd come to have a man like
that on such intimate terms ? How did he come to
be killed by a man he’d seen every day for years ?
He was famous as being a judge of men.”

Father Brown thumped his umbrella on the
ground with an emphasis he rarely showed.

Yes,” he said, almost fiercely. ” That Was
how he came to be killed. He was killed for just
that. He was killed for being a judge of men.”

They all stared at him, but he went on, almost as
if they were not there.

” Whit is any man that he should be a judge of
men ? ” he demanded. ” These three were the
tramps that once stood before him and were dis-
missed rapidly right and left to one place or another;
as if for them there were no cloak of courtesy, no
stages of intimacy, no fttt will in fiiendship. And
twenty years has not exhausted the indignation borne
of that un&thomable insult in that moment when he
dsued to know them at a glance.”

” Tea,” said the secretary, ** I understand
MS


• • •



The Incredulity of Father Brown

and I understand how it is that you luiderstand — all
sorts of things.”

” Well, I’m blamed if I understand,” cried the
breezy Western gentleman boisterously. “ Your
Wilson and your Irishman seem to be just a couple
of cut-throat murderers who killed their benefactor.
I’ve no use for a black and bloody assassin of that
sort in my morality, whether it’s religion or not.”

” He was a black and bloody assassin, no doubt,”
said Fenner, quietly. “ I’m not defending him; but
I suppose it’s Father Brown’s business to pray for
all men, even for a man like——”

** Yes,” assented Father Brown, ” it’s my busi-
ness to pray for all men, even for a man like Warren
Wynd.”


«44



V

THE CURSE OF THE GOLDEN CROSS


Six people sat round a small table, seeming almost
as incongruous and accidental as if they had been
shipwrecked separately on the same small desert
island. At least the sea surrounded them; for in
one sense their island was enclosed in another island,
a large and flying island like Laputa. For the
little table was one of many little tables dotted about
in the dining saloon of that monstrous ship the
Moraviay speeding through the night and the ever-
lasting emptiness of the Atlantic. The little com-
pany had nothing in common except that all were
travelling from America to England. Two of them
at least might be called celebrities; others might
be called obscure, and in one or two cases even
dubious.

The first was the famous Professor Smaill, an
authority on certain archseological studies touching
the later Byzantine Empire. His lectures, delivered
in an American University, were accepted as of the
first authority even in the most authoritativa seats
of learning in Europe. His literary works were
so steeped in a mellow imd imaginative qrmpeithy

*45



The Incredulity of Father Brown

with the European past, that it often gave strangers
a start to hear him speak with an American accent.
Yet he was in his way very American; he had long
fair hair brushed back from a big square forehead,
long straight features and a curious mixture of
preoccupation with a poise of potential swiftness,
like a lion pondering absent-mindedly on his next
leap.

There was only one lady in the group; and she
was (as the journalists often said of her) a host in
herself; being quite prepared to play hostess, not
to say empress, at that or any other table. She was
Lady Diana Wales, the celebrated lady traveller in
tropical and other countries; but there was nothing
rugged or masculine about her appearance at dinner.
She was herself handsome in an almost tropical
fiuhion, with a mass of hot and heavy red hair; she
was dressed in what the journalists call a daring
fisshion, but her face was intelligent and her eyes
had that bright and rather prominent appearance
which belongs to the eyes of ladies who ask questions
at political meetings.

The other four figures seemed at first like
shadows in this shining presence; but they showed
difiFerences on a closer view. One of them was a
young man entered on the ship's register as Pkul
T. Tarrant. He was an American type which might
be more truly called an American antitype. Every
nation probably has an antitype; a 89rt of extreme

146



The Curse of the Golden Cross

exception that proves the national rule. Americans
really respect work, rather as Europeans respect war.
There is a halo of heroism about it; and he who
shrinks from it is less than a man. The antitype
is evident through being exceedingly rare. He is
the dandy or dude; the wealthy waster who makes
a weak villain for so many American novels. Paul
Tarrant seemed to have nothing whatever to do
but to change his clothes, which he did about six
times a day ; passing into paler or richer shades of his
suit of exquisite light grey, like the delicate silver
changes of the twilight. Unlike most Americans,
he cultivated very carefully a short curly beard;
and unlike most dandies, even of his own type, he
seemed rather sulky than showy. Perhaps there
was something almost Byronic about his silence and
his gloom.

The next two, travellers were naturally classed
together; merely because they were both English
lect\irers returning from an American tour. One of
them was described as Leonard Smyth, apparently
a minor poet, but something of a major journalist;
long-headed, light-haired, perfectly dressed and
perfectly capable of looting after himself. The
other was a rather comic contrast, being short and
broad, with a Uack walrus moustache, and as tadtum
as the other was talkative. But as he had been both
charged with robbing and praised for rescuing a
Rou m a nian Princess threatened by a jaguar in hia

*47



The Incredulity of Father Brown

travelling menagerie, and had thus figured in a
fashionable case, it was naturally felt that his views
on God, progress, his own early life, and the future of
Anglo-American relations would be of great interest
and value to the inhabitants of Minneapolis and
Omaha. The sixth and most insignificant figure
was that of a little English priest going by the name
of Brown. He listened to the conversation with
respectful attention, and he was at that moment
forming the impression that there was one rather
curious thing about it.

I suppose those Byzantine studies of yours,
Professor,” Leonard Smyth was saying, ” would
throw some light on this story of a tomb found some-
where on the south coast; near Brighton, isn’t it ?
Brighton’s a long way from Byzantium, of course.
But I read something about the style of biirying or
embalming or something being supposed to be
Byzantine.”

” Byzantine studies certainly have to reach a
long way,” replied the Professor dryly. ” They talk
about specialists; but I think the hardest thing on
earth is to specialize. In this case, for instance:
how can a man know anything about Byzantium
till he knows everything about Rome before it
and about Islam after it ? Most Arab arts were old
Byzantine arts. Why, take algebra——”

”But I won’t take algebra,” cried the lady
decisively. ” I never did and I never do. But

148



The Curse of the Golden Cross

I’m awfully interested in embalming. I was with
Gatton, you know, when he opened the Babylonian
tombs. Ever since then I found mummies and
preserved bodies and all that perfectly thrilling.
Do tell us about this one.”

“ Gatton was an interesting man,” said the
Professor. “ They were an interesting family.
That brother of his who went into Parliament was
much more than an ordinary politician. I never
understood the Fascisti till he made that speech
about Italy.”

“ Well, we’re not going to Italy on this trip,”
said Lady Diana persistently, “ and I believe you’re
going to that little place where they’ve found the
tomb. In Sussex, isn’t it ? ”

“ Sussex is pretty large, as these little English
sections go,” replied the Professor. “ One might
wander about in it for a goodish time; and it’s a
good place to wander in. It’s wonderful how larg
those low hills seem when you’re on them.”

There was an abrupt accidental silence; and then
the lady said, “ Oh, I’m going on deck,” and rose,
the men rising with her. But the Professor lin>
gered, and the little priest was the last to leave the
table, carefully folding up his napkin. And as they
were thus left alone together the Professor said
suddenly to his companion : ^

*' What would you say was the point of that
litdetalk?”


*49



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ Well,” said Father Brown smiling, “ since
you ask me, there was something that amused me
a little. I may be wrong; but it seemed to me that
the company made three attempts to get you to
talk about an embalmed body said to be found in
Sussex. And you, on your side, very courteously
offered to talk — first about algebra, and then about
the Fascist!, and then about the landscape of the
Downs.”

“ In short,” replied the Professor, ” you thought
I was ready to talk about any subject but that one.
You were quite right.”

The Professor was silent for a little time,
looking down at the table-cloth; then he looked up
and spoke with that s^ft impulsiveness that sug-
gested the lion’s leap.

” See here. Father Brown,” he said, ” 1 con-
sider you about the wisest and whitest man I ever
met.”

Father Brown was very English. He had all
the normal national helplessness about what to do
snth a serious and sincere compliment suddenly
handed to him to his fiu:e, in the American manQtf .
His xeply was a meaningless murmur; and it widilro
Professor who proceeded, with the same staccato
earnestness :

“ You see, up to a point it’s all simple enough.
A Christian tomb of the Dark Ages, apparently
of a tnshop, has been fbimd under a little ^urdi

ISO



The Curse of the Golden Cross

at Dulham on the Sussex coast. The Vicar hap-
pens to be a good bit of an archeologist himself
and has been able to find out a good deal more than
I know yet. There was a rumour of the corpse
being embalmed in a way peculiar to Greeks and
Egyptians but unknown in the West, especially
at that date. So Mr. Walters (that is the Vicar)
naturally wonders about Byzantine influences. But
he also mentions something else, that is of even more
personal interest to me.”

His long grave face seemed to grow even longer
and graver as he frowned down at the table-cloth.
His long finger seemed to be tracing patterns on
it like the plans of dead cities and their temples
and tombs.

" So I'm going to tell you, and nobody els<^
why it is I have to be careful about mendoning that
matter in mixed company; and why, the more eager
they are to talk about it, the more cautious I have to
be. It is also stated that in the coflin is a chain
with a cross, common enough to look at, but with
a cotun secret symbol on the back found on only
one other cross in the wbAd. It is from the arcana
^ the very earliest Church and is supjpos^ to
indicate St. Peter setting up his See afr'Antftch
before to Rome. Anyhow, I belies there

u but one other like it, and it belongs to xaa, I hear
there is some story about a curse on it; but 1 take no
nodce of that, ^t whether or no there is a curacy

* 5 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

there really is in one sense a conspiracy; though the
conspiracy should only consist of one man.”

“ Of one man ? ” repeated Father Brown almost
mechanically.

“ Of one madman, for all I know,” said Professor
Smaill. “ It’s a long story and in some ways a silly
one.”

He paused again, still tracing plans like archi-
tectural drawings with his finger on the cloth, and
then resumed :

” Perhaps I had better tell you about it from
the beginning, in case you see some little point
in the story that is meaningless to me. It began
years and years ago, when I was conducting some
investigations on my own account in the antiquities
of Crete and the Greek islands. I did a great deal
of it practically single-handed; sometimes with the
most rude and temporary help from the inhabitants
of the place, and sometimes literally alone. It was
under the latter circtimstances that I found a nuze
of subterranean passages which led at last to a heap
of rich refuse, broken ornaments and scattered gems
which I took to be the ruins of some sunken altar,
and in which 1 found the curious gold cross. I
turned it over, and on the back of it I saw the
Ichthus or fish, which was an early Christian symbol,
but of a shape and pattern rather difilerent from that
commonly found; and, as it seemed to me, mote
realistic — more as if the archaic designer had meant

isa



The Curse of the Golden Cross


it to be not merely a conventional enclosure or
ttimbus, but to look a little more like a real fish.
It seemed to me that there was a flattening towards
one end of it that was not like mere mathematical
decoration, but rather like a sort of rude or even
savage zoology.

“ In order to explain very briefly why I thought
this find important, I must tell you the point of the
excavation. For one thing, it had something of the
nature of an excavation of an excavation. We were on


the track not only of antiquities, but of the 'anti-
quarians of antiquity. We had reason to believe, or
some of us thought we had reason to believe, that these
underground passages, mostly of the Minoan period)
like that flimous one which is actually identified with
the labyrinth of the Minotaur, had not really been
lost and left undisturbed for all the ages between
the Minotaur and the modern explorer. We
believed that these underground places, I might
almost say these underground towns and villages,
been penetrated during the intervening
piWrtrf sofiss" persons prompted by some motive.
About the motive there were different schools of
thought: some holding that the Emperors had
orcter^ an official exploration out of mere scientific
curiosity; others that the furious fashion in the latR'
Rjwnan Empire for aU sorts of lurid Asiatic super-
stitions had started some namdess Manichgan sect
or other rioting in the caverns in otgies tiiat had
* *M



The Incredulity of Father Brown

to be hidden from the face of the sun. I belong to
the group which believed that these caverns had
been used in the same way as the catacombs.
That is, we believed that, during some of the perse-
cutions which spread like a fire over the whole
Empire, the Christians had concealed themselves
in these ancient pagan labyrinths of stone. It was
therefore with a thrill as sharp as a thunderclap
that I found and picked up the fallen golden cross
and saw the design upon it; and it was with still
more of a shock of felicity that, on turning to
make my way once more outwards and upwards
into the light of day, 1 looked up at the walls of
bare rock that extended endlessly along the low
passages, and saw scratched in yet ruder outline,
but if possible more unmistakable, the shape of the
Fish.

** Something about it made it seem as if it might
be a fossil fish or some rudimentary organism fixed
for ever in a frozen sea. I could not analyse this
analogy, otherwise unconnected with a mere drawing
scratched or scrawled upon the stone, till 1 realized
that I was saying in my subconscious mind that the
first Christians must have seemed something like
fi«h, dumb and dwelling in a fidlen world of twilight
and silence, dropped fisr below the feet of men and
mo\dng in dark and twilight and a soundless world.

“ Everyone walking dong stone passages knows
what it is to be followed by phantom feet. The

< 5 «



The Curse of the Golden Cross

echo follows flapping or clapping behind or in front^
so that it is almost impossible for the man who is
really lonely to believe in his loneliness. I had
got used to the effects of this echo and had not
noticed it much for some time past, when I caught
sight of the symbolical shape scrawled on the wall
of rock. I stopped, and at the same instant it
seemed as if my heart stopped too. For my own
feet had halted, but the echo went marching on.

“ I ran forward, and it seemed as if the ghostly
footsteps ran also, but not with that exact imitation
which marks the material reverberation of a sound.
I stopped again, and the steps stopped also; but I
could have sworn they stopped an instant too late;
I called out a question; and my cry was answered;
but the voice was not my own.

" It came round the corner of a rock just in front
of me; and throughout that tucanny chase I noticed
that it was always at some such angle of the crooked
itpidt that it paused and spoke. The little space in
'front of me that could be illuminated by my small
electric torch was always as empty as an enq>ty
room. Under these conditions I had a conversation
with I know not whom, which lasted all the way

f > the first white gleam of daylight, and even there
could not see in what finhion he vanished into the
light of day. But the mouth of the labyrinth was
bdl of many openings and cracks and chasms,
iVlIlMf tioald not have been difficult fi>r him to have

IM



The Incredulity of Father Brown

somehow darted back and disappeared again into
the underworld of the caves. I only know that I
came out on the lonely steps of a great motintain
like a marble terrace, varied only with a green vege-
tation that seemed somehow more tropical than the
purity of the rock, like that Oriental invasion that has
spread sporadically over the fall of classic Hellas.
I looked out on a sea of stainless blue, and the sun
shone steadily on utter loneliness and silence; and
there was not a blade of grass stirred with a whisper
of flight .nor the shadow of a shadow of man.

It had been a terrible conversation; so inti-
mate and so individual and in a sense so casual.
This being, bodiless, feceless, nameless and yet
calling me by my name, had talked to me in those
crypts and cracks where we were buried alive with
no more passion or melodrama than if we had been
sitting in two arm-chairs at a club. But he had
told me also that he would unquestionably kill me
or any other man who came into the possession of
the cross with the mark of the fish. He told me
frankly he was not fool enough to attack me there
in the labyrinth, knowing I had a loaded revolver,
and that he ran as much risk as I. But he told me
equally calmly that he would plan my murder with
the certainty of success, with every detail developed
and every danger warded o£F, with the sort of
artistic perfection that a Chinese craftsmen or an
Indian embroiderer gives to the artntic work of a

156



The Curse of the Golden Cross

lifetime. Yet he was no Oriental; I am certain
he was a white man. I suspect that he was a coun-
tryman of my own.

“ Since then I have received from time to time
signs and symbols and queer impersonal messages
that have made me certain at least that if the man is a
maniac he is a monomaniac. He is always telling
me, in this airy and detached way, that the pre-
parations for my death and burial are proceeding
satisfactorily; and that the only way in which I can
prevent their being crowned with a comfortable
success is to give up the relic in my possession^the
unique cross that I found in the cavern. He does
not seem to have any religious sentiment or fiui-
aticism on the point; he seems to have no passion
but the passion of a collector of curiosities. That
is one of the things that makes me feel sure he is a
man of the West and not of the East. But this
particular curiosity seems to have driven him quite
crazy.

“ And then came this report, as yet unsubstan-
tiated, about the duplicate relic fotmd on an em-
balmed body in a Sussex tomb. If he had been a
maniac before, this news turned him into a deihoniac
possessed of seven de^s. That there should be
one of them belonging to another man was bad
enough, but that there should be two of them and
nmtiier belonging to him was a torture not to be
borne. His mad messages began to conus tiiick and

*57



The Incredulity of Father Brown

&8t like showers of poisoned arrows; and each
cried out more confidently than the last that my death
would strike me at the moment when I stretched
out my unworthy hand towards the cross in the tomb.

“ * You Twll neyer know me,’ he wrote, ‘ you will
never say my name; you will never see my face; you
will die and never know who has killed you. I may
be in any form among those about you; but I shall
be in that alone at which you have forgotten to
look.’

“ From those threats I deduce that he is quite
likely to shadow me on this expedition; and try to
steal the relic or do me some mischief for possessing
it. But as I never saw the man in my life, he may be
almost any man I meet. Logically speaking, he
may be any of the waiters who wait on me at table.
He may be any of the passengers who sit with me
at table.”

” He may be me,” said Father Brown, with
cheerful contempt for grammar.

” He nuy be anyb^y else,” answered Smaill
seriously. ” That is what I meant by what I said
just now. You are the only man I feel sure is not
the enemy.”

Father Brown again looked embarrassed; then
he smiled and said, “ Well, oddly enough. I’m not*
What we have to consider is any chance of finding
out if he really is here before be — before he makes
himself unpleasant.”


158



The Curse of the Golden Cross

“ There is one chance of finding out, I thinl^
remarked the Professor rather grimly. ** When
we get to Southampton I shall take a car at once
along the coast; I should be glad if you would come
with me, but in the ordinary sense, of course, out
little party will break up. If any one of them turns
up again in that little church)rard on the Sussex coast,
we shall know who he really is.”

The Brofessor’s programme was duly carried
out, at least to the extent of the car and its cargo
in the form of Father Brown. They coasted along
the road with the sea on one side and the hills of
Hampshire and Sussex on the other; nor was there
visible to the eye any shadow of pursuit. As they
approached the village of Dulham only one man
crossed their path who had any connexion with the
matter in hand; a journalist who had just visited the
chyrch and been courteously escorted by the vicar
through the new excavated chapel; but his remarks
and notes seemed to be of the ordinary newspaper
sort. But Professor Smaill was perhaps a little
fimcifiil, and could not dismiss the sense somo'
thing odd and discourag^g in the attitude and
appearance of the man, who was tall and shabby,
hook-nosed and hollow-eyed, with moustaches that
drooped with depression. He seemed anything but
enlivened^ his late experiment as a sightseer; in-
deed, he seemed to striding as fiut as possible from
the sight, when they stopp^ him irith a question-

ISO



The Incredulity of Father Brown

It*s all about a curse,” he said; ” a curse on
the place, according to the guide-book or the parson
or the oldest inhabitant or whoever is the authority;
and really, it feels jolly like it. Curse or no curse,
I'm glad to have got out of it.”

“ Do you believe in curses ? ” asked Smaill
curiously.

” I don’t believe in anything; I’m a journalist,”
answered the melancholy being — “ Boon, of the
Dtttly fVire. But there’s a something creepy about
that crypt; and I’ll never deny I felt a chill.” And
he strode on towards the railway station with a
further accelerated pace.

” Looks like a raven or a crow, that fellow,”
observed Smaill as they turned towards the church-
yard. ” What is it they say about a bird of ill
omen ? ”

They entered the churchyard slowly, the eyes
of the American antiquary lingering luxuriantly
over the isolated roof of the lych-gate and the large
unfathomable black growth of the yew looking like
night itself defying the broad daylight. The path
climbed up amid heaving levels of turf in which the
gravestones were tilted at all angles like stone rafts
tossed on a green sea, till it came to the ridge beyond
which the great grey sea itself ran like an iron bar,
with pale lights in it like steel. Almost at their
feet the tough rank grass turned into a tuft of sea-
holly and ended in grey and yellow sand; and a foot



The Curse of the Golden Cross

or two from the holly, and outlined darkly against
the steely sea, stood a motionless figure. But for
its dark grey clothing it might almost have been the
statue on some sepulchral monument. But Father
Brown instantly recognized something in the elegant
stoop of the shoulders and the rather sullen outward
thrust of the short beard.

Gee I ’* exclaimed the professor of archaeology,
“ it’s that man Tarrant, if you call him a man.
Did you think, when I spoke on the boat, that I
should ever get so quick an answer to my question ? ”
“ I thought you might get too many answers to
it,” answered Father Brown.

“ Why, how do you mean ? ” inquired the Pro-
fessor, darting a look at him over his shoulder.

” I mean," answered the other mildly, " that
I thought I heard voices behind the yew-tree. I
don’t think Mr. Tarrant is so solitary as he looks;
I might even venture to say, so solitary as he likes
to look.”

Even as Tarrant turned slowly round in his
moody nunner, the confirmation came. Another
voice, high and rather hard, but none the less
feminine, was saying with experienced raillery:

” And how was I to know he would be here ? ”
It was borne in upon Professor Smaill that this
gay observation was not addressed to him; so he
was forced to conclude, in some bewilderment, that
yet a third person was present. As Lady Diana

(6i



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Wales came out radiant and resolute as ever from
the shadow of the yew, he noted grimly that she had
a living shadow of her own. The lean dapper figure
of Leonard Smyth, that insinuating man of letters,
appeared immediately behind her own flamboyant
form, smiling, his head a little on one side like a
dog’s.

“ Snakes I ” muttered Smaill. “ Why, they’re
all here i Or all except that little showman with
the walrus whiskers.”

He heard Father Brown laughing softly beside
him; and indeed the situation was becoming some-
thing more than laughable. It seemed to be
turning topsy-turvy and tumbling about their
ears like a pantomime trick; for even while the
Professor had been speaking, his words had received
the most comical contradiction. The round head
with the grotesque black crescent of moustache
had appeared suddenly and seemingly out of a hole
in the ground* An instant afterwards they realized
that the- hole was in fact a very large hole, leading
to a ladder which descended into the bowels of the
earth; that it was in fact the entrance to the subter-
ranean scene they had come to visit. The litde
man had been the first to find the entrance and had
idready descended a rung or two of the ladder before
he put his head out again to address his fellow-
travellers. He looked like some particularly pro-
postero u s Grave-digger in a burlesque of HtmUet,



The Curse of the Golden Cross

He only said thickly behind his thick moustaches,
“ It is down here.” But it came to the rest of
the company with a start of realization that, though
they had sat opposite him at meal-times for a week,
they had hardly ever heard him speak before; and
that though he was supposed to be an English
lecturer, he spoke with a rather occult foreign
accent.

“ You see, my dear Professor,” cried Lady
Diana with trenchant cheerfulness, ” your Byzan-
tine mummy was simply too exciting to be missed.
I simply had to come along and see it; and I’m sure
the gentlemen felt just the same. Now you must
tell us all about it.”

” 1 do not know all about it,” said the Professor
gravely, not to say grimly. ” In some respects
I don’t even know what it’s all about. It certtunly
seems odd that we should have all met again so
soon; but I suppose there are no limits to the modern
thirst for information. But if we are all to visit
the place k must be done in a responsible way and,
if you will forgive me, under responsible leadership.
We must notify whoever is in c^ge of the ezcavir
tions; we shall probably at least have to put our names
in a book.”

Something rather like a wrangle followed on
this coUisbn between the impatience of tiie lady
and the susfncions of the archeologist; but the
latter’s insistence on the oflSdal rights of the Wear

iCg



The Incredulity of Father Brown

and the local investigation ^ultimately prevailed;
the little man with the moustaches came reluctantly
out of his grave again and silently acquiesced in a
less impetuous descent. Fortunately, the clergy-
man himself appeared at this stage, a grey-haired,
good-looking gentleman with a droop accentuated
by double eyeglasses; and while rapidly establishing
sympathetic relations with the Professor as a fellow-
antiquarian, did not seem to regard his rather
motley group of companions with anything more
hostile than amusement.

“ I hope you are none of you superstitious,"
he said pleasantly. “ I ought to tell you, to start
with, that there are supposed to be all sorts of bad
omens and curses hanging over our devoted heads
in this business. I have just been deciphering
a Latin inscription which was found over the en-
trance to the chapel; and it would seem that there
are no less than three airses involved; a curse for
entering the sealed chamber, a double curse for
opening the coffin, and a triple and most terrible
curse for touching the gold relic found inside it.
The two first maledictions I have already incurred
myself," he added with a smile, " but I fear that
even you will have to incur the first and mildest of
them if you are to see anything at ail. According
to the story, the curses descend in a rather lingering
fashion, at long intervals and on later occasions.
I don't know whedier that is any comfiort to you."

164



The Curse of the Golden Cross

And the Reverend Mr. Walters smiled once more
in his drooping and benevolent manner.

“ Story,” repeated Professor Smaill, “ why,
what story is that ? ”

” It is rather a long story and varies, like other
local legends,” answered the Vicar. ” But it is un-
doubtedly contemporary with the time of the tomb;
and the substance of it is embodied in the inscrip-
tion and is roughly this: Guy de Gisors, a lord of
the manor here early in the thirteenth century,
had set his heart on a beautiful black horse in
possession of an envoy from Genoa, which that prac-
tical merchant prince would not sell except for a huge
price. Guy was driven by avarice to the crime of
pillaging the shrine and, according to one story,
even killing the bishop, who was then resident there.
Anyhow, the hiahop uttered a curse which was to
fell on anybody who should continue to withhold the
gold cross from its resting-place in his tomb,
or should take steps to disturb it when it had re-
turned there. The feudal lord raised the money
for the horse by selling the gold relic to a gold-
smith in. the town; but on the first day he mounted
the horse the animal reared and threw him in front
of die church porch, breaking his neck. Mean-
while the goldsmith, hitherto wealthy and prosperoos,
was ruined by a series of ineiqiUcable acddents,
and fidl into the power of a Jew money-lender Imng
in the manoa. Eventually the unfiMtunate gold*

Ids



The Incredulity of Father Brown

smith, fificed with nothing but starvation, hanged
himself on an apple-tree. The gold cross, with all
his other goods, his house, shop, and tools, had
long ago passed into the possession of the money-
lender. Meanwhile the son and heir of the feudal
lord, shocked by the judgment on his blasphemous
sire, had become a religious devotee in the dark
and stern spirit of those times, and conceived it his
duty to persecute all heresy and unbelief among his
vassals. Thus the Jew in his turn, who had been
cynically tolerated by the father, was ruthlessly
burnt by order of the son; so that he in his turn
suffered for the possession of the relic; and after
these three judgments, it was returned to the
bishop’s tomb; since when no eye has seen and no
hand has touched it.”

Lady Diana Wales seemed to be more impressed
than might have been expected.

” It really gives one rather a shiver," she said,
” to think that we are going to be the first, except
die vicar.”

The pioneer with the big moustaches and the
broken ^glish did not descend after all by his
favourite ladder, which indeed had only been used
by some of the workmen conducting the excavstion;
fox the clergyman led them round to a larger and
toaxe convenient entrance about a hundred yards
away, out of which he himself had just emerged from
hb bves^iations underground. Here the descent

i«6



The Curse of the Golden Cross

was by a feirly gradual slope with no difficulties
save the increasing darkness; for they soon found
themselves moving in single file down a tunnel pp
black as pitch, and it was some little time before
they saw a glimmer of light ahead of diem. Oii|e
during that silent march there was a sound like p
catch in somebody's breath, it was impossible, to
say whose; and once there was an oath like a dull
explosion, and it was in an unknown tongue.

They came out in a circular chamber Uke a
basilica in a ring of round arches; for that chapel
had been built before the first pointed arch of the
Gothic had pierced our civilization like a spear.
A glimmer of greenish light between some of the
pillars marked the place of the other opening into
the world above, and gave a vague sense c^ being
under the sea, which was intensified by one or two
other incidental and perhaps fanciful resemblances.
For the dog-tooth pattern of the Norman was fiundy
traceable round all the arches, giving them, above
die cavernous darkness, something of the look of die
mouths of monstrous sharks. And in the centre
the dark bulk of the tomb itself, with its fifited lid
of stone, might almost have been the jaws of some
such leviathan.

Whether out OS a sense of fitaeu or from the
lack ei more modem appliances, Che clerical and^
quary had arranged for illumination of the chiqid
4^7 by four candles in big wooden can^-

lOy



The Incredulity of Father Brown

sticks standing on the floor. Of these only one
was alight when they entered, casting a faint
glimmer over the mighty architectural forms. When
they had all assembled, the clergyman proceeded
ttf light the three others, and the appearance and
contents of the great sarcophagus came more clearly
into ^ew.

All eyes went first to the face of the dead, pre-
served across all those ages in the lines of life by
some secret Eastern process, it was said, inherited
from heathen antiquity and unknown to the simple
graveyards of our own island. The Professor
could hardly repress an exclamation of wonder;
for, though the face was as pale as a mask of wax,
it looked otherwise like a sleeping man who had but
that moment closed his eyes. The face was of the
ascetic, perhaps even the fanatical type, with a high
framework of bones; the figure was clad in a golden
cope and gorgeous vestments, and high up on the
breast, at the base of the throat, glittered the fiunous
gold cross upon a short gold chain, or rather neck-
lace. The stone coffin had been opened by lifdng
the lid of it at the head and propping it aloft upon
two strong wooden shafts or poles, hitched above
under the edge of the upper slab and wedged below
into the corners of the coflin behind the head of die
corpse. Less amid therefisre be seen of the feet
or ^e lower part of the figure, but the candle-light
^ne full on the fsce; and in contrast with its times

i68



The Curse of the Golden Cross

of dead ivory the cross of gold seemed to stir and
sparkle like a fire.

Professor Smaill’s big forehead had carried a
big furrow of reflection, or possibly of worry,
ever since the clergyman had told the story of ^e
curse. But feminine intuition, not untouched by
feminine hysteria, understood the meaning of his
brooding immobility better than did the men
around him. In the silence of that candle4it
cavern Lady Diana cried out suddenly:

“ Don't touch it, I tell you 1 ”

But the man had already made one of his sw^
leonine movements, leaning forward over the body.
The next instant they all darted, some forward and
some backward, but all with a dreadful ducking
motion as if the sky were falling.

As the Professor laid a finger on the gold cross,
the wooden props, that bent very slightiy in support-
ing the lifted lid of stone, seemed to jump and
straighten themselves with a jerk. The lip of the
Stone slab slipped from its wooden perch; and in all
their souls and stomachs came a sickening sense of
down-rushing ruin, as if they had all been flung off
a precipice. Smaill had withdrawn his head swffifly,
but not in time; and he lay senseless beside the oofifin,
in a red puddle of blood ftom scalp or skull* And
the <dd Stone ooflhi was once more cl os e d as it bad
been tat centuries; save that one or two stidES or
^lintett stuck in tise crevice^ horribly suggestiso

t> iSq



The Incredulity of Father Brown

of bones crunched by an ogre. The leviathan had
snapped its jaws of stone.

Lady Diana was looking at the wreck with eyes
that had an electric glare as of Itmacy; her red hair
looked scarlet against the pallor of her face in the
greenish twilight. Smyth was looking at her,
still with something dog-like in the turn of his head;
but it was the expression of a dog who looks at a
master whose <ktastrophe he can only partly under-
stand. Tarrant and the foreigner had stiffened in
their usual sullen attitudes; but their faces had turned
the colour of clay. The Vicar seemed to have
fainted. Father Brown was kneeling beside the
fallen figure, trying to test its condition.

Rather to the general surprise, the Byronic
lounger, Paul Tarrant, came forward to help
him.

“ He’d better be carried up into the air,” he
said. ” I suppose there’s just a chance for him.”

“ He isn’t dead,” said Father Brown in a low
voice, ” but I think it’s pretty bad; you aren’t a
doctor, by any chance ? ”

“ No, but I’ve had to pick up a good many
things in my time,” said the other. “ But qever
mind about me just now. My real profeasioii
would probably surprise you.”

” I don’t think so,” replied Father Brown,
with a alight smile. ” I thought of it about half-
way through the voyage. You are a detective



The Curse of the Golden Cross

shadowing somebody. Well> the cross is safe fixim
thieves now, anyhow.’*

While they were speaking Tarrant had lifted
the frail figure of the fallen man with easy strength
and dexterity and was carefully carrying him towards
the exit. He answered over his shoulder, ** Tes,
the cross is safe enough.”

*' You mean that nobody else is,” replied Brown.
” Are you thinking of the curse, too ? ”

Father Brown went about for the next hour or
two tuider a burden of frowning perplexity that was
something beyond the shock of the tragic accident.
He assisted in carrying the victim to the little inn
opposite the church, interviewed the doctor, who
reported the injury as serious and threatening,
though not certainly fatal, and carried the news
to the little group of travellers who had gathered
round the table in the inn parlour. But wherever
he went the cloud of mystification rested on him
and seemed to grow darker the more deeply he
pondered. For the central mystery was growing
more and more mysterious, actually in proportion
as many of the minor mysteries began to clear them*
selves up in his mind. Exactly in proportion as the
meaning of individud figures in that motley group
began to explain itself, the thing that had happened
grew naore and more difilcult to explain, lieonard
Smyth had come merely because Lady Diana had
come; and Lady Diana had come merely because

171



The Incredulity of Father Brown

she chose. They were engaged in one of those
floating Society flirtations that are all the more silly
for being semi-intellectual. But the lady’s roman-
ticism had a superstitious side to it; and she was
pretty well prostrated by the terrible end of her ad-
venture. Paul Tarrant was a private detective^
possibly watching the flirtation, for some wife or
husband; possibly shadowing the foreign lecturer
with the moustaches, who had much the air of an
undesirable alien. But if he or anybody else had
intended to steal the relic, the intention had been
finally frustrated. And, to all mortal appearance,
what had frustrated it was either an incredible coin-
cidence or the intervention of the ancient curse.

As he stood in unusual perplexity in the middle
of the village street, between the inn and the church,
he felt a mild shock of surprise at seeing a recently
fluniliar but rather imexpected figure advancing up
the street. Mr. Boon, the journalist, looking very
haggard in the sunshine, which showed up his shabby
raiment like that of a scarecrow, had his dark and
deep-set eyes (rather close together on either side of
the long drooping nose) fixed on the priest. The
latter Itwked twice before he realized that the heavy
dark moustache hid something like a grin or at least
a grim smile.

“ I thought you were going away ” said Father
Brown a litde sharply. I thought you left by
train two hours ago.”



The Curse of the Golden Cross

Well, you see I didn’t,'* said Boon.

** Why have you come back ? ” asked the
priest almost sternly.

" This is not the sort of little nuul paradise
for a journalist to leave in a hiirry,” replied the
other. “ Things happen too fast here to make it
worth while to go back to a dull place like London.
Besides, they can’t keep me out of the aiBiir— I mean
this second affair. It was I that found the body,
or at any rate the clothes. Quite suspicious con*
duct on my part, wasn’t it ? Perhaps you think
I wanted to dress up in his clothes. Shouldn’t 'I
make a lovely parson ? ”

And the lean and long-nosed mountebank
suddenly made an extravagant gesture in the middle
of the market-place, stretching out his arms and
spreading out his dark gloved hands in a sort
burlesque benediction and saying, " Oh, my dear
brethren and sisters, for I would embrace you
all . . ."

" What on earth are you talking about ?
cried Father Brown, and rapped the stones slightly
with his stumpy umbrella, for he was a little lest
patient than usual.

“ Oh, you’ll fipd out all about it if you ask that
picnic party of yours at the inn," replied Boon scorn-
fully. " That man Tarrant seems to suspect me
merely because I found the clothes; though he on^
came up a minute too late to find them himsem

*73



The Incredulity of Father Brown

But there ate all sorts of mysteries in this business.
The little man with the big moustaches may have
more in him than meets the eye. For that matter,
I don’t see why you shouldn’t have killed the poor
fellow yoiu-self.”

Father Brown did not seem in the least annoyed
at the suggestion, but he seemed exceedingly
bothered and bewildered by the remark.

“ Do you mean,” he asked with simplicity,
“ that it was I who tried to kill Professor Smaill ? ”

“ Not at all,” said the other, waving his hand
with the air of one making a handsome concession.
“ Plenty of dead people for you to choose among.
Not limited to Professor Smaill. Why, didn’t you
know somebody else had turned up, a good deal
deader than Professor Smaill ? And I don’t see
why you shouldn’t have done him in, in a quiet way.
Religious differences, you know . . . lamentable
disunion of Christendom. ... I suppose you’ve
always wanted to get the English parishes back.”

” I’m going back to the inn,” said the priest
quiedy; ” you say the people there know what you
mean; and perhaps they may be able to say it.”

In truth, just afterwards his private perplexi-
ties suffered a momentary dispersal at the news
of a: new calamity. The moment he entered the
Utde parlour where the rest of the company were
collected, something in their pale Bices told him
they were shaken by something yet more recent than

•74



The Curse of the Golden Cross

the accident at the tomb. Even as he entered
Leonard Smyth was saying: “ Where is all tlus
going to end ? "

" It will never end, I tell you,*' repeated Lady
Diana, gazing into vacancy with glassy eyes; “ it
will never end till we all end. One after another
the curse will take us; perhaps slowly, as the poor
vicar said; but it will take us all as it has taken him.**

“ What in the world has happened now ? **
asked Father Brown.

There was a silence, and then Tarrant said in a
voice that sounded a little hollow :

“ Mr. Walters, the Vicar, has committed
suicide. I suppose it was the shock unhinged him.
But I fear there can be no doubt about it. We*ve just
found his black hat and clothes on a rock jutting out
from the shore. He seems to have jumped into
the sea. I thought he looked as if it had knocked him
half-witted, and perhaps we ought to have looked
after him; but there was so much to look after.**

“ You could have done nothing,*’ said the lady.
“ Don't you see the thing is dealing doom in a sort
of dreadful order ? The Professor touched the
cross, and he went first; the Vicar had opened
the tomb, and he went second; we only entered the
chapel, and we——**

“ Hold on,” said Father Brown, in a sharp
voice he very seldom used; ** this has got to stop.**

He still wore a heavy thou^ unoonscioiii
»7S



The Incredulity of Father Brown

frown, but in his eyes was no longer the cloud of
mystification, but a light of almost terrible under-
standing.

What a fool I am I ** he muttered. “ I
ought to have seen it long ago. The tale of the curse
ought to have told me.*'

“ Do you mean to say," demanded Tarrant,
*' that we can really be killed now by something
that happened in the thirteenth century ? **

Father Brown shook his head and answered
with quiet emphasis:

" I won’t discuss whether we can be killed by
something that happened in the thirteenth century.
But I’m jolly certain that we can’t be killed by some-
thing that never happened in the thirteenth century,
something that never happened at all."

“ Well,” said Tarrant, " it’s refreshing to find
a priest so sceptical of the supernatural as all
that."

" Not at all," replied the priest calmly; “ it’s
not the supernatural part I doubt. It’s the natural
part. I’m exactly in the position of the man who
said, * I can believe the impossible, but not the
improbable.’ ’’

" That’s what you call a paradox, isn’t it ? ’’
asked the other.

" It’s what I call common sense, properly under-
stood," replied Father Brown. “ It reidly is more
natural to believe a preternatural story, that deals

176



The Curse of the Golden Cross

with things we don't understand, than a natural
story that contradicts things we do understand.
Tell me that the great Mr. Gladstone, in his last
hours, was haunted by the ghost of Parnell, and I will
be agnostic about it. But tell me that Mr. Gladstone*
when first presented to Queen Victoria, wore his
hat in her drawing-room and slapped her on the
back and offered her a cigar, and I am not agnostic
at all. That is not impossible; it’s only incredible.
But I’m much more certain it didn’t happen than
that Parnell’s ghost didn’t appear; because it vio-
lates the laws of the world I do understand. So it
is with that tale of the curse. It isn’t the legend
that I disbelieve — ^it’s the history.”

Lady Diana had recovered a little from her
trance of Cassandra, and her perennial curiosity
about new things began to peer once more out of her
bright and prominent eyes.

“ What a curious man you are I ” she said.
“ Why should you disbelieve the history ? ”

“ I disbelieve the history because it isn’t his-
tory,” answered Father Brown. “ To anybody who
happens to know a little about the Mi^le Ages,
the whole story was about as probable as Gladstone
oflFering Queen Victoria a cigar. But does anybody
know anything about the Middle Ages ? Dto you
know what a Guild was ? Have you ever heard
of saho toanagh suo f Do you luow what sort
of people were Servi Rti^s f ”

*77



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ No, of coiirse I don’t,” said the lady, rather
crossly. “ What a lot of Latin words 1 ”

“ No, of course,” said Father Brown. “ If it
had been Tutankhamen and a set of dried-up
Africans preserved, Heaven knows why, at the other
end of the world; if it had been Babylonia or China;
if it had been some race as remote and mysterious
as the Man in the Moon, your newspapers would
have told you all about it, down to the last discovery
of a tooth-brush or a collar-stud. But the men who
built your own parish churches, and gave the names
to your own towns and trades and the very roads
you walk on — it has never occurred to you to know
anything about them. I don't claim to know a lot
myself; hut I know enough to see that story is
stuff and nonsense from beginning to end. It
was illegal for a money-lender to distrain on a
man’s shop and tools. It’s exceedingly unlikely
that the Guild would not have saved a man from such
utter ruin, especially if he were ruined by a Jew.
Those people had vices and tragedies of their own;
they sometimes tortured and burned people. But
that idea of a man, without God or hope in the world,
crawling away to die because nobody cared whether
he lived — that isn’t a medieval idea. That’s a
product of our economic science and progress.
The Jew wouldn’t have been a vassal of the
feudal lord. The Jews normally had a special
position as servants of the King. Above aU, the

178



The Curse of the Golden Cross

Jew couldn’t possibly have been burned for his
religion.”

” The paradoxes are multiplying,” observed
Tarrant, “ but surely you won’t deny that Jews
were persecuted in the Middle Ages ? ”

” It would be nearer the truth,” said Father
Brown, ” to say they were the only people who
weren’t persecuted in the Middle Ages. If you want
to satirize medisevalism, you could make a good
'Case by saying that some poor Christian might be
burned alive for making a mistake about the Ho-
moousian, while a rich Jew might walk down the
street openly sneering at Christ and the Mother
of God. Well, that’s what the story is like. It
was never a story of the Middle Ages; it was never
even a legend about the Middle Ages. It was made
up by somebody whose notions came from novels
and newspapers; and probably made up on the spur
of the moment.”

The others seemed a little dazed by the historical
digression, and seemed to wonder vaguely why the
priest emphasized it and made it so important
a part of the puzzle. But Tarrant, whose trade it
was to pick the practical detail out of many tangles
of digression, had suddenly become alert. His
beard^ chin was thrust forward farther than ever,
but his sullen eyes were wide awake.

'* Ah,” he said; ” made up on the spur of , the
moment I ”


*79



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ Perhaps that is an exaggeration,” admitted
Father Brown calmly. “ I should rather say made
up much more casually and carelessly than the rest
of an uncommonly careful plot. But the plotter
did not think the details of mediseval history would
matter much to anybody. And his calculation
in a general way was pretty nearly right, like most
of his other calculations.”

“ Whose calculations ? Who was right ? ”
demanded the lady with a sudden passion of im-
patience. ” Who is this person you are talking
about ? Haven’t we gone through enough, without
your making our flesh creep with your hes and'
hims ? ”

” I am talking about the murderer,” said Father
Brown.

” What murderer ? ” she asked sharply. ** Do
you mean that the poor Professor was murdered ? ”

” Well,” said the staring Tarrant gruffly into
his beard, ” we can’t say ‘ murdered,' for we don't
know he's killed.”

” The murderer lulled somebody else, who was
not Professor Smaill,” said the priest gravely.

” Why, whom else could he kill ? ” asked the
other.

” He killed the Reverend John Walters, the
Vicar of Dulham,” replied Father Brown with pre-
ciuon. “ He only wanted to kill those two,
because they both had got hold of relics of one rare

i8o



The Curse of the Golden Cross

pattern. The murderer was a sort of monomaniac
on the point.”

” It all sounds very strange,” muttered Tarrant.

Of course we can’t swear that the Vicar’s really
dead either. We haven’t seen his body.”

“ Oh yes, you have,” said Father Brown.

There was a silence as sudden as the stroke of
a gong; a silence in which that sub-conscious guess-
work that was so active and accurate in the woman
moved her almost to a shriek.

“ That is exactly what you have seen,” went
on the priest. “ You have seen his body. You
'haven’t seen him, the real living man; but you have
seen his body all right. You have stared at it hard
by the light of four great candles; and it was not
tossing suicidally in the sea, but lying in state like
a Prince of the Church in a shrine built before the
Crusades.”

” In plain words,” said Tarrant, ” you actually
ask us to believe that the embalmed body was really
the corpse of a murdered man.”

Father Brown was silent for a moment; then
he said almost with an air of irrelevance:

” The first thing I noticed about it was the
cross; or rather the string suspending the cross.
Naturally, for most of you, it was only a string of
beads and nothing else in particular, but, naturally
also, it was rather more in my line than yours.
You remember it lay close up to the chin, with only

i8i



The Incredulity of Father Brown

a few beads showing, as if the whole necklet were
quite short. But the beads that showed were
arranged in a special way, first .one and then three,
and so on; in fact, I knew at a glance that it was a
rosary, an ordinary rosary with a cross at the end of
it. But a rosary has at least five decades and addi-
tional beads as well; and I naturally wondered where
all the rest of it was. It would go much more than
once round the old man’s neck. I couldn’t under-
stand it at the time; and it was only afterwards I
guessed where the extra length had gone to. It
was coiled round and round the foot of the wooden
prop that was fixed in the corner of the coffin,
holding up the lid. So that when poor Smaill
merely plucked at the cross, it jerked the prop out
of its place and the lid fell on his skull like a club
of stone.”

“ By George I ” said Tarrant, “ I’m beginning
to think there’s something in what you say. This is
a queer story if it’s true.”

” When I realized that,” went on Father Brown,
” I could manage more or less to guess the rest.
Remember, first of all, that there never was any
responsible archeological authority for anything
more than investigation. Poor old Walters sags
an honest antiquary, who was engaged in opeliuag
tbe tomb to find out if there was any trudi in the
legend about embalmed bodies. The rest was all
rumour, of the sort that often anticipetes or exag-

i8a



The Curse of the Golden Cross

gerates such finds. As a fact, he found the bod^
Lid not been embalmed, but had fiUIen into dust
long ago. Only while he was working there by the
light of his lonely candle in that sunken cbapel,
the candle-light threw another shadow that was not
his own.”

” Ah 1 ” cried Lady Diana with a catch in her
breath ; ” and I know what you mean now. You
mean to tell us we have met the murderer, talked
and joked with the murderer, let him tell us a ro-
mance tale, and let him depart untouched."

” Leaving his clerical disguise on a rock,”
assented Brown. ” It is all dreadfully simple.
This man got ahead of the Professor in the race to
the churchyard and chapel, possibly while the Pro-
fessor was talking to that lugubrious journalist.
He came on the old clergyman beside the empty
coffin and killed him. Then he dressed himself
in the black clothes from the corpse, wrapped it in
an old cope which had been among the real finds
of the exploration, and put it in the coffin, arranging
the rosary and the wooden support as 1 have
described. Then, having thus set the trap for his
second enemy, he went up into the daylight and
greeted us all with the most amiable politeness of a
country clergyman.”

*' He ran a considerable risk,” objected Tarrant,
** of somebody knowing Walters by sight.”

admit he was half-mad,” agreed Father
183



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Brown; “and I think you will admit that the risk
was worth taking, for he has got off, after all/*

“ I’ll admit he was very lucky,’’ growled Tar-
rant. “ And who the devil was he ? ’’

“As you say, he was very lucky,’’ answered
Father Brown, “ and not least in that respect.
For that is the one thing we may never know.’’

He frowned at the table for a moment and then
went on : “ This fellow has been hovering round and
threatening for years, but the one thing he was
careful of was to keep the secret of who he was;
and he has kept it still. But if poor Smaill recovers,
as 1 think he will, it is pretty safe to say that you will
hear more of it.’’

“ Why, what will Professor Smaill do, do you
think ? ’’ asked Lady Diana.

“ 1 should think the first thing he would do,’’
said Tarrant, “ would be to put the detectives on
like dogs after this murdering devil. I should like
to have a go at him myself.’’

“ Well,’’ said Father Brown, smiling suddenly
after his long fit of frowning perplexity, “ I think
1 know the very first thing he ought to do.’’

“ And what is that ? ’’ asked Lady Diana with
graceful eagerness.

“ He ought to apologize to all of you,’’ said
Father Brown.

It was not upon this point, however, that Father
Brown found himself talking to Professor Smaill

184



The Curse of the Golden Cross

as he sat by the bedside during the slow con
valescence of that eminent archaeologist. Nor in-
deed was it chiefly Father Brown who did the talking;
for though the Professor was limited to small doses
of the stimulant of conversation, he concentrated
most of it upon these interviews with his clerical
friend. Father Brown had a talent for being silent
in an encouraging way. And Smaill was encouraged
by it to talk about many strange things not always
easy to talk about; such as the morbid phases of
recovery and the monstrous dreams that often
accompany delirium. It is often rather an unbal-
ancing business to recover slowly from a bad knock
on the head; and when the head is as interesting
a head as that of Professor Smaill even its dis-
turbances and distortions are apt to be original
and curious. His dreams were like bold and big
designs rather out of drawing, as they can be seen in
the strong but stiff archaic arts that he had studied;
they were full of strange saints with square and tri-
angular haloes, of golden outstanding crowns and
glories round dark and flattened &ces, of eagles out
of the east and the high head-dresses of bearded men
with their hair bound like women. Only, as he told
his friend, there was one much simpler and less
entangled type that continually recurred to his
imaginative memory. Again and again all these
Byzantine patterns would fade away like the fading
gold on which th^ were traced as upon fire; and
M 185



The Incredulity of Father Brown

nothing remained but the dark bare wall of rock on
which the shining shape of the fish was traced as
with a finger dipped in the phosphorescence of
fishes. For that was the sign which he once looked
up and saw, in the moment when he first heard
round the corner of the dark passage the voice of his
enemy.

“ And at last,” he said, ” I think I have seen
a meaning in the picture and the voice; and one that
I never understood before. Why should I worry
because one madman among a million of sane men,
leagued in a great society against him, chooses to
brag of persecuting me or pursuing me to death ?
The man who drew in the dark catacomb the secret
symbol of Christ was persecuted in a v««y different
fashion. He was the solitary madman; the whole
sane society was leagued together not to save but
to slay him. I have sometimes fussed and fidgeted
and wondered whether this or that man was my per-
secutor; whether it was Tarrant; whether it was
Leonard Smyth; whether it was any one of them.
Suppose it had been all of them I Suppose it had
been all the men on the boat and the men on the
train and the men in the village. Suppose, so fiu
as I was concerned, tlTey were all murderers. I
thought I had a right to be alarmed because I was
creeping through the bowels of the earth in the dark
and there was a man who wo\ild destroy me. What
would it have been like, if the destroyer had been

i86



The Curse of the Golden ^ross

up in the daylight and had owned all the earth and
commanded all the armies and the crowds ? How
if he had been able to stop all the earths or smoke
me out of my hole or kill me the moment I put my
nose out in the daylight ? What was it like to deal
with murder on that scale ? The world has for-
gotten these things, as until a little while ago it
had forgotten war.”

“ Yes,” said Father Brown, “ but the war came.
The fish may be driven underground again, but
it will come up into the daylight once more. As
St. Antony of Padua humorously remarked, it is
only fishes who survive the Deluge.”



VI

THE DAGGER WITH WINGS

Father Brown, at one period of his life, found
it difficult to hang his hat on a hat>peg without
repressing a slight shudder. The origin of this
idiosyncrasy was indeed a mere detail in much more
complicated events; but it was perhaps the only
detail that remained to him in his busy life to remind
him of the whole business. Its remote origin was
to be found in the facts which led Dr. Boyne, the
medical officer attached to the police force, to send
for the priest on a particular 'frosty morning in
December.

Dr. Boyne was a big dark Irishman, one of those
rather baffling Irishmen to be found all over the
world, who will talk scientific scepticism, material-
ism and cynicism at length and at large, but who
never dream of referring anything touching the
ritual of religion to anything except the traditional
religion of their native land. It would be hard to
say whether their creed is a very superficial varnish
or a very fundamental substratum; but most prob-
ably it is both, with a mass of materialism in between.
Anyhow, when he thought that matters of that sort

188



The Dagger with Wings

might be involved, he asked Father Brown to call,
though he made no pretence of preference for that
aspect of them.

“ I’m not sure I want you, you know,” was his
greeting. ” I’m not sure about anything yet. I’m
hanged if I can make out whether it’s a case ^br a
doctor, or a policeman, or a priest.”

“ Well,” said Father Brown with a smile, ** as
1 suppose you’re both a policeman and a doctor^
I seem to be rather in a minority.”

” I admit you’re what politicians call an
instructed minority,” replied the doctor. ” I mean I
know you’ve had to do a little in our line as well as
your own. But it’s precious hard to say whether this
business is in your line or ours, or merely in the
line of the Commissioners in Lunacy. ‘ We’ve
just had a message from a man living near here, in
that white house on the hill, asking for protection
against a murderous persecution. We’ve gone into
the facts as far as we could, and perhaps I’d better
tell you the story as it is supposed to have happened,
from the beginning.

“ It seems that a man named Aylmer, who was
a wealthy landowner in the West Country, married
rather lite in life and had three sons, Philip, Stephen
and Arnold. But in his bachelor days, when he
thought he would have no heir, he had adopted
a boy whom he thought very brilliant and prom>
ising, who went by the name of John Strake. His

s 89



The Incredulity of Father Brown

origin seems to be vague; they say he was a fotmd-
ling; some say he was a gipsy. I think the last
notion is mixed up with the fact that Aylmer in his
old age dabbled in all sorts of dingy occultism,
including palmistry and astrology, and his three
sons say that Strake encouraged him in it. But they
said a great many other things besides that. They
said Strake was an amazing scoundrel, and especially
an amazing liar; a genius in inventing lies on the spur
of the moment and telling them so as to deceive
a detective. But that might very well be a natural
prejudice, in the light of what happened. Perhaps
you can more or less imagine what happened. The
old man left practically everything to the adopted
son; and when he died the three real sons disputed
the will. They said their father had been frightened
into surrender and, not to put too fine a point on it,
into gibbering idiocy. They said Strake had the
strangest and most cunning ways of getting at him,
in spite of the nurses and the family, and terrorizing
him on his death-bed. Anyhow, they seemed to
have proved something about the dead man’s mental
condition, for the courts set aside the will and the
sons inherited. Strake is said to have broken out
in the most dreadful fashion, and sworn he would
kill all three of them, one after another, and that
nothing could hide them from his vengeance. It
is the ^ird or last of the brothers, Arnold Aylmer,
who is asldng for police protection.”

190



The Dagger with Wings

" Third and last,” said the priest, looking at
him gravely.

“ Yes,” sud Boyne. “ The other two are
dead.”

There was a silence before he continued.
“ That is where the doubt comes in. There is
no proof they were murdered, but they might
possibly have been. The eldest, who took up his
position as squire, was supposed to have committed
suicide in his garden. The second, who went
into trade as a manufacturer, was knocked on the
head by the machinery in his factory; he might v$ry
well have taken a false step and fallen. But if
Strake did kill them, he is certainly very cunning
in his way of getting to work and getting away.
On the other hand, it’s more than likely that t^
whole thing is a mania of conspiracy founded on a
coincidence. Look here, what I want is this:
I want somebody of sense, who isn’t an official,
to go up and have a talk to this Mr. Arnold Aylmer,
and form an impression of him. You know what
a man with a delusion is like, and how a mao
looks when he is telling the truth. I want you
to be the advance guard, before we take the
matter up.”

” It seems rather odd,” said Father Brown, ” that
you haven’t had to take it up before. If there »
anything in this business, it seems to have been
going on for a good time. Is there any particular

191



The Incredulity of Father Brown

reason why he should send for you just now,
any more than any other time ? "

That had occurred to me, as you may imagine,'*
answered Dr. Boyne. “ He does give a reason,
but I confess it is one of the things that make me
wonder whether the whole thing isn’t only the whim
of some half-witted crank. He declares that all
his servants have suddenly gone on strike and left
him, so that he is obliged to call on the police to
look after his house. And on making inquiries,
I certainly do find that there has been a general
exodus of servants from that house on the hill;
and of course the town is full of tales, very one-sided
tales I daresay. Their account of it seems to be
that their employer had become quite impossible
in his fidgets and fears and exactions; that he wanted
them to guard the house like sentries or sit up like
night nurses in a hospital; that they could never be
left alone because he must never be left alone.
So they all announced in a loud voice that he was a
lunatic, and left. Of course that does not prove
he is a lunatic; but it seems rather rum nowadays for
a man to expect his valet or his parlour-mud to act
as an armed guard.”

“ And so,” said the priest with a smile, ” he
wants a policeman to act as his parlour-maid
because his parlour-nuiid won’t act as a policeman.”

“ I thought that rather thick, too,” agreed the
doctor, *' but 1 can’t take the responsibility of a flat

19a



The Dagger with Wings

refusal till I’ve tried a compromise. You are
the compromise."

" Very well," said Father Brown simply, ** I’ll
go and cidl on him now if you like."

The rolling country round the little town was
sealed and bound with firost, and the sky was as clear
and cold as steel, except in the north-east, where
clouds with lurid haloes were beginning to climb
up the sky. It was against these darker and more
sinister colours that the house on the hill gleamed
with a row of pale pillars, forming a short colonnade
of the classical sort. A winding road led up to it
across the curve of the down, and plunged into
a mass of dark bushes. Just before it reached the
bushes the air seemed to grow colder and colder, as
if he were approaching an ice-house or the North
Pole. But he was a highly practical person, never
entertaining such fancies except as fancies. And
he merely cocked his eye at the great livid cloud
crawling up over the house, and remarked cheer-
fully:

“ It’s going to snow."

Through a low ornamental iron gateway of the
Italianate pattern he entered a garden having some-
thing of t^t desolation which only belongs to the
disorder of orderly things. Deep-green growths
were grey with the faint powder of the frost, large
weeds had fringed the fading pattern of the flower-
beds as if in a ragged frame; and the house stood as if

•V3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

waist-high in a stunted forest of shrubs and bushes.
The vegetation consisted largely of evergreens or
very hardy plants; and though it was thus thick and
heavy, it was too northern to be called luxuriant.
It might be described as an Arctic jungle. So it
was in some sense with the house itself, which had a
row of columns and a classical fa9ade, which might
have looked out on the Mediterranean; but which
seemed now to be withering in the wind of the
North Sea. Classical ornament here and there
accentuated the contrast; caryatides and carved
masks of comedy or tragedy looked down from
corners of the building upon the grey confusion of
the garden paths; but the faces seemed to be frost-
bitten. The very volutes of the capitals might have
curled up with the cold.

Father Brown went up the grassy steps to a
square porch flanked by big pillars and knocked at
the door. About four minutes afterwards he
knocked again. Then he stood still patiently
waiting with his back to the door and looked out
on the slowly darkening landscape. It was darken-
ing under the shadow of that one great continent of
cloud that had come flying out of the north; and
even as he looked out beyond the pillars of the porch,
which seemed huge and black above him in the
twilight, he saw the opalescent crawling rim of the
great cloud as it sailed over the roof and bowed over
the porch like a canopy. The grey canopy with its

*94



The Dagger with Wings

fiiintly coloured fringes seemed to sink lower and
lower upon the garden beyond, until what had
recently been a dear and pale-hued winter sky was
lefr in a few silver ribbons and rags like a sickly
sunset. Father Brown waited; and there was no
soimd within.

Then he betook himself briskly down the steps
and round the house to look for another entrance.
He eventually found one, a side door in the flat
wall; and on this also he hammered and outside
this also he waited. Then he tried the handle and
found the door apparently bolted or fastened in
some fashion; and then he moved along that side
of the house, musing on the possibilities of the posi-
tion, and wondering whether the eccentric Mr.
Aylmer had barricaded himself too deep in the house
to hear any kind of summons; or whether perhaps
he would barricade himself all the more, on the
assumption that any summons must be the challenge
of the avenging Strake. It might be that the de-
camping servants had only unlocked one door when
they left in the morning, and that their master had
locked that; but whatever he might have done it
was unlikely that they, in the mood of that moment,
had looked so carefully to the defences. He
continued his prowl round the place ; it was not really
a large place, though perhaps a little pretentious;
and in a few moments he found he had made the
complete circuit. A moment after he found what

*95



The Incredulity of Father Brown

he suspected and sought. The French window of
one room, curtained and shadowed with creeper,
stood open by a crack, doubtless accidentally left
ajar, and he found himself in a central room, comfort-
ably upholstered in a rather old-fashioned way,
with a staircase leading up from it on one side and
a door leading out of it on the other. Immediately
opposite him was another door, with red glass let
into it, a little gaudily for later tastes; something
that looked like a red-robed figure in cheap stained
glass. On a round table to the right stood a sort
of aquarium — a great bowl full of greenish
water, in which fishes and similar things moved
about as in a tank; and just opposite it a plant of the
palm variety with very large green leaves. All this
looked so very dusty and Early Victorian that the
telephone, visible in the. curtained alcove, was almost
a surprise.

“ Who is that ? ” a voice called out sharply
and rather suspiciously from behind the stained-
glass door.

" G)uld 1 see Mr. Aylmer f ” asked the priest
apologetically.

The door opened and a gentleman in a peacock
green dressing-gown came out with an inquiring
look. His hair was rather rough and untidy, as if
he had been in bed or lived in a state of slowly
getting up, but his eyes were not only awake but
alert, and some would have said alarmed. Father

196



The Dagger with Wings

Brown knew that the contradiction was likely
enough in a man who had rather run to seed, under
the shadow either of a delusion or a danger. He had
a fine aquiline face when seen in profile, but when
seen full face the first impression was of the un-
tidiness and even the wilderness of his loose brown
beard.

“ I am Mr. Aylmer,” he said, “ but I have got
out of the way of expecting visitors.”

Something about Mr. Aylmer’s unrestful eye
prompted the priest to go straight to the point.
If the man’s persecution was only a monomania,
he would be the less likely to resent it.

“ I was wondering,” said Father Brown softly,
” whether it is quite true that you never expect
visitors.”

” You are right,” replied his host steadily, “ I
always expect one visitor. And he may be the last.”

” I hope not,” said Father Brown, ” but at least
I am relieved to infer that I do not look very like
him.”

Mr. Aylmer shook himself with a sort of savage
laugh. “ You certainly do not,” he said.

” Mr. Aylmer,” said Father Brown frankly,
” I apologize for the liberty, but some friends of
mine have told me about your trouble, and asked me
to see if I could do anything for you. The truth
is, I have some little experience in afl&irs like this."

” There are no affiurs like this,” ssud Aylmer.

*97



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

“ You mean,” observed Father .Brown, ** that
the tragedies in your unfortunate family were not
normal deaths ? ”

” I mean they were not even normal murders,”
answered the other. ” The man who is hounding
us all to death is a hell-hound, and his power is
from hell.”

*' All evil has one origin,” said the priest gravely.
“ But how do you know they were not normal
murders ? ”

Aylmer answered with a gesture which offered
his guest a chair; then he seated himself slowly in
another, frowning, with his hands on his knees; but
when he looked up his expression had grown milder
and more thoughtful, and his voice was quite
cordial and composed.

” Sir,” he said, ” I don’t want you to imagine
that I’m in the least an unreasonable person. I
have come to these conclusions by reason, because
unfortunately reason really leads there. I have read
a great deal on these subjects; for I was the only one
who inherited my fiither’s scholarship in somewhat
obscure matters, and I have since inherited his
library. But what I tell you does not rest on what
I have read but on what I have seen.”

Father Brown nodded, and the other proceeded,
as if picking his words :

” In my elder brother’s case I was not certain at
first. There were no marks footprints where



The Dagger with Wings

he was found shot, and the pistol was*left beside
him. But he had just received a threatening letter,
certainly from our enemy, for it was marked with
a sign like a winged dagger, which was one of his
infernal cabalistic tricks. And a servant said she had
seen something moving along the garden wall in
the twilight that was much too large to be a cat.
I leave it there; all I can say is that if the murderer
came, he managed to leave no traces of his coming.
But when my brother Stephen died it was different;
and since then I have known. A machine was work-
ing in an open scaffolding under the factory tower;
I scaled the platform a moment after he had fallen
imder the iron hammer that struck him; I did not see
anything else strike him, but I saw what I saw.

“ A great drift of factory smoke was rolling
between me and the factory tower; but through a rift
of it I saw on the top of it a dark human figure
wrapped in what looked like a black cloak. Then
the sulphurous smoke drove between us again;
and when it cleared I looked up at the distant
chimnqr— 4here was nobody there. 1 am a
rational man, and I will ask all rational men how he
had reached that dizzy tmapproachable turret,
and how he left it.”

He stared across at the priest with a sphinx-like
dullenge ; then after a silence he said abruptly:

**My brother’s brains were knocked out, but
his body was not much damaged. And in his

199



The Incredulity of Father Brown

pocket we found one of those warning messages
dated the day before and stamped with the flying
dagger.”

” I am sur^” he went on gravely, that the
symbol of the winged dagger is not merely arbitrary
or accidental. Nothing about that abominable man
is accidental. He is all design; though it is indeed
a most dark and intricate design. His mind is
woven not only out of elaborate schemes but out of
all sorts of secret languages and signs and dmnb sig-
nals and wordless pictures which are the names of
nameless things. He is the worst sort of man
that the world knows; he is the wicked mystic.
Now, I don’t pretend to penetrate all that is conveyed
by this symbol; but it seems surely that it must have
a relation to all that was most remarkable, or even
incredible, in his movements as he had hovered
round my unfortimate family. Is there no con-
nexion between the idea of a winged weapon and
the mystery by which Philip was struck dead on his
own lawn without the lightest touch of any foot-
print having disturbed the dust or grass ? Is there
no connexion between the plumed poignard flying
like a feathered arrow and that figure which hung
on the tVu* top of the toppling cl^ney, clad in a
cloak for pinions i ”

” You mean,” said Father Brown thought-
fully, ” that he is in a perpetual state of levitation.”

“ Simon Magus did it,” replied Aylmer,

‘MIO



The Dagger, with Wings

“ and it was one of the commonest predictions of
the Dark Ages that Antichrist would be able to
fly. Anyhow, there was the flying dagger on the
document; and whether of no it could fly, it could
certainly strike.”

“ Did you notice what sort of paper it was on ? ”
asked Father Brown. “ Common paper ? ”

The sphinx'like face broke abruptly into a harsh
laugh.

“ You can sec what they’re like,” said Aylmer
grimly, “ for I got one myself this morning.”

He was leaning back in his chair now, with his
long legs thrust out from under the green dressing-
gown, which was a little short for him, and' his
bearded chin pillowed on his chest. Without mov-
ing otherwise, he thrust his hand deep in the dress-
ing-gown pocket and held out a fluttering scrap of
paper at the end of a rigid arm. His whole attitude
was suggestive of a sort of paralysis, that was both
rigidity and collapse. But ^e next remark of the
priest had a curious effect of rousing him.

Father Brown was blinking in his short-sighted
way at the paper presented to him. It was a singular
sort of paper, rough without being common, as
from an artist’s sketch-book ; and on it was drawn
boldly inured ink a dagger decorated with wings
like the rod of Hermes, with the written wor(^
Death comes the day after this, as it came to yotir
brothars.”

> - aoi



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Father Brown tossed the paper on the floor
and sat bolt upright in his chair.

“ You mustn’t let that sort of stuff stupefy
you,” he said sharply. “ These devils always try
to make us helpless by making us hopeless.”

Rather to his surprise, an awakening wave went
over the prostrate figure, which sprang from its
chair as if startled out of a dream.

You’re right, you’re right 1 ” cried Aylmer
with a rather uncanny animation, ” and the devils
shall find I’m not so hopeless after all, nor so
helpless either. Perhaps I have more hope and
better help than you fancy.”

He stood with his hands in his pockets, frowning
down at the priest, who had a momentary doubt,
during that strained silence, about whether the man’s
long peril had not touched the man’s brain. But
when he spoke it was quite soberly.

” I believe my unfortunate brothers failed be-
cause they used the wrong weapons. Philip
carried a revolver, and that was how his death came
to be called suicide. Stephen had police protec-
tion, but he also had a sense of what made him
ridiculous; and he could not allow a policeman to
climb up a ladder after him to a scaffolding where
he sfood only a moment. They were both scoffers,
reacting into scepticism from the strange mysticism
of my frther’s last days. But I always knew there
was more in my father than they understood. It



The Dagger with Wings

|is true that by studying magic he fell at last under
^e blight of black magic; the black magic of this
[scoundrel Strake. But my brothers were wrong
^about the antidote. The antidote to black magic
is not brute materialism or worldly wisdom. The
antidote to black magic is white magic.”

“ It rather depends,” said Father Brown,
“ what you mean by white magic.”

” I mean silver magic,” said the other, in a low
voice, like one speaking of a secret revelation.
Then after a silence he said, “ Do you know what
I mean by silver magic ? Excuse me a moment.”

He turned and opened the central door with
red glass and went into a passage beyond it. The
house had less depth than Brown had supposed:
instead of the door opening into interior rooms, the
corridor it revealed ended in another door on the
garden. The door of one room was on one side
of the passage; doubtless, the priest told himself,
the proprietor’s bedroom whence he had rushed
out in his dressing-gown. There was nothing else
on that side but an ordinary hat-stand with the
ordinary dingy cluster of old hats and overcoats;
but on the o^er side was something more inter-
esting; a very dark old oak sideboard laid out with
some old silver, and overhung by a trophy or oma^
ment of old weapons. It was by this that Arnold
Aylmer halted, looking up at a long antiquateo
pistol with a bell*«haped mouth.



The Incredulity of Father Brown

The door at the end of the {>assage was barely
open; and through the crack came a streak of white
daylight. The priest had very quick instincts about
natural things; and something in the unusual
brilliancy of that white line told him what had
happened outside. It was indeed what he had
prophesied when he was approaching the house.
He ran past his rather startled host and opened the
door; to face something that was at once a blank
and a blaze. What he had seen shining through the
crack was not only the more negative whiteness
of daylight but the positive whiteness of snow. All
rotmd, the sweeping fall of the country was covered
with that shining pallor that seems at once hoary
and innocent.

“ Here is white magic anyhow,” said Father
Brown in his cheerful voice. Then as he turned
back into the hall he murmured, *' And silver magic
too, I suppose,” for the white lustre touched the
silver with splendour and lit up the old steel here
and there in the darkling armoury. The shaggy
head of the brooding Aylmer seemed to have a ^o
of silver fire, as he turned with his face in shadow
and the outlandish pistol in his hand.

“ Do you know why I choose this sort of old
blunderbuss ? ” he asked. “ Because I can load it
with this sort of bullet”

He had picked up a small apostle spoon from
the sideboard, and by sheer violence broke off the

*04



The Dagger, with Wings

small figure at the top. “ Let us go back into tlM
other room,” he added.

” Did you ever read about the death of Dun-
dee ? ” he asked when they had reseated themselves.
He had recovered from his momentary annoyance
at the priest’s restlessness. ” Graham of Claver-
house, you know, who persecuted the Covenanters
and had a black horse that could ride straight up
a precipice. Don’t you know he could only be shot
with a silver bullet, because he had sold himself
to the Devil ? That’s one comfort about you; at
least you know enough to believe in the Devil.”

” Oh, yes,” replied Father Brown, *‘ I believe
in the Devil. What I don’t believe in is the Dundee.
I mean the Dundee of Covenanting legends, with
his nightmare of a horse. John Graham was simply
a seventeenth- century professional soldier, rather
better than most. If he dragooned them it was
because he was a dragoon, but not a dragon. Now
my experience is that it’s not that sort of swaggering
blade who sells himself to the Devil. The devil-
worshippers I’ve known were quite different. Not
to mention names, which might cause a social
fiutter. I’ll take a man in Dundee’s own day. Hav$
you ever heard of Dalrymple of Stair ? ”

” No,” replied the other gruffly.

** You’ve heard of what he did,” said Father
Brown, “ and it was worse than anything Dundee
ever ^ ; yet he escapes the infiuny by oblivion.

SOS



The Incredulity of Father Brown

He was the man who made the Massacre of Glencoe.
He was a very learned man and lucid lawyer, a
statesman with very serious and enlarged ideas of
statesmanship, a quiet man with a very refined and
intellectual fiice. That’s the sort of man who sells
himself to the Devil.”

Aylmer half started from his chair with an
enthusiasm of eager assent.

” By God I you are right,” he cried. ” A
refined intellectuid face 1 That is the face of John
Strake.”

Then he raised himself and stood looking at
the priest with a curious concentration. “ If you
will wait here a little while,” he said, ” 1 will show
you something.”

He went back through the central door, closing
it after him; going, the priest presumed, to the old
sideboard or possibly to his bedroom. Father
Brown remained seated, gazing abstractedly at
the carpet, where a faint red glimmer shone from
the glass in the doorway. Once it seemed to
brighten like a ruby and then darkened again,
as if the sun of that stormy day had passed from
cloud to cloud. Nothing moved except the aquatic
creatures which floated to and fro in Ae dim green
bowl. Father Brown was thinking hard.

A minute or two afterwards he got up and slipped
quietly to the alcove of the telephone, where he rang
up his friend Dr. Boyne, at the oflicial headquarters.



The Dagger with Wings

“ I wanted to tell you about Aylmer and his afiairs,”
he said quietly. “ It*s a queer story, but I rather
think there’s something in it. If I were you I’d
send some men up here straight away; four or five
men, I think, and surround the house. If anything
does happen there’ll probably be something start-
ling in the way of an escape.”

Then he went back and sat down again, staring
at the dark carpet, which again glowed blood-red
with the light from the glass door. Something in
that filtered light set his mind drifting on certain
borderlands of thought, with the first white day-
break before the coming of colour, and all that
mystery which is alternately veiled and revealed in
the symbol of windows and of doors.

An inhuman howl in a human voice came from
beyond the closed doors; almost simultaneously
with the noise of firing. Before the echoes of the
shot had died away the door was violently flung open
and his host staggered into the room, the dressing-
gown half torn from his shoulder and the long pistol
smoking in his hand. He seemed to be shaking in
every limb, yet he was shaken in part with an
unnatural laughter.

** Glory be to the White Magic I ” he cried,
” Glory be to the silver bullet 1 The hell-hound
has hunted once too often, and my brothers are
avenged at last.”

He sank into a chair and the pistol slid from

•or



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

his hand and fell oh the floor. Father Brown darted
past him, slipped through the glass door and went
down the passage. As he did so he put his hand
on the handle of the bedroom door, as if half
intending to enter; then he stooped a moment,
as if examining something; and then he ran to the
outer door and opened it.

On the field of snow, which had been so blank
a little while before, lay one black object. At the
first glance it looked a little like an enormous bat.
A second glance showed that it was, after all, a
human figure; fallen on its face, the whole head
covered by a broad black hat having something of a
Latin-American look; while the appearance of
black wings came from the two flaps or loose sleeves
of a very vast black cloak spread out, perhaps by
accident, to their utmost length on either side. Both
the hands were hidden, though Father Brown thought
he could detect the position of one of them, and saw
close to it, under the edge of the cloak, the glimmer
of some metallic weapon. The main effect, however,
was curiously like that of the simple extravagances
of heraldry; like a black eagle displayed on a white
ground. But by walking round it and peering
under the hat the priest got a glimpse of the face,
which was indeed what his host had called refined
and intellectual; even sceptical and austere: the fisce
of John Strake.

“ Well, J'm jiggered,” muttered Father Brown*

MS



The Dagger with Wings

“ It really does look like some vast vampire that
has swooped down like a bird.”

“ How else could he have come i ” came a voice
from the doorway; and Father Brown looked up to
see Aylmer once more standing there.

“ Couldn’t he have walked ? ” replied Father
Brown evasively.

Aylmer stretched out his arm and swept the
white landscape with a gesture.

“ Look at the snow,” he said in a deep voice
that had a sort of roll and thrill in it. Is not the
snow unspotted — ^pure as the white magic you your-
self called it ? Is there a speck on it for miles, $ave
that one foul black blot that has fallen there ?
There are no footprints, but a few of yours and mine;
there are none approa<diing the house from any-
where.”

Then he looked at the little priest for a moment
with a concentrated and curious expression, and
said:

“ I will tell you something else. That cloak
he flies vdth is too long to walk with. He was not
a very tall man; and it would trail behind him like
a^ royal train. Stretch it out over his body, if you
like, and see.”

** What happened to you both ? ” asked Father
Brown abruptly.

“ It was too swift to describe,”, answered Aylmer.
“ I had looked out of the door and was turning back

409



The Incredulity of Father Brown

when there came a kind of rushing of ^nnd all
around me, as if I were being buffeted by a wheel
revolving in mid-air. I spun round somehow and
fired blindly; and then I saw nothing but what you
see now. But I am mortally certain you wouldn’t
see it, if I had not had a silver shot in my gun. It
would have been a different body lying there in the
snow.”

“ By the way,” remarked Father Brown, “ shall
we leave it lying there in the snow ? Or would you
like it taken into your room — I suppose that’s your
bedroom in the passage ? ”

“ No, no,” replied Aylmer hastily, *‘ we must
leave it there till the police have seen it. Besides,
I’ve had as much of such things as I can stand for
the moment. Whatever else happens. I’m going
to have a drink. After that, they can hang me if
they like.”

Inside the central apartment, between the palm
plant and the bowl of fishes, Aylmer tumbled into
a chair. He had nearly knocked the bowl over
as he lurched into the room, but he had managed
to find the decanter of brandy after plunging his
hand rather blindly into several cupboards and
comers. He did not at any time look like a meth-
odical person; but at this moment his distn^on
must have been extreme. He drank with a long
gulp and began to talk rather feverishly, as if to fill
up a silence.


aio



The Dageer with Wings

“ I see you are still doubtful,” he sud, ” though
you have seen the thing with your own eyes.
Believe me, there was something more behind the
quarrel between the spirit of Strake and the spirit
of the house of Aylmer. Besides, you have no busi-
ness to be an unbeliever. You ought to stand for
all the things these stupid people call superstitions.
Come now, don’t you think there’s a lot in those
old wives’ tales about luck and charms and so on,
silver bullets included ? What do you say about
them as a Catholic ? ”

“ I say I’m an agnostic,” replied Father Brown,
smiling.

“ Nonsense,” said Aylmer impatiently. ” It’s
your business to believe things.”

“ Well, I do believe some things, of course,”
conceded Father Brown; ” and therefore, of course,
1 don’t believe other things.”

Aylmer was leaning forward, and looking at
him with a strange intensity that was almost like
that of a mesmerist.

” You do believe it,” he said. ** You do believe
everything. We all believe everything, even when
we dwy everything. The deniers believe. The
unbelievers believe. Don’t you feel in your heart
that these contradictions do not really contradict;
that there is a cosmos that contains them all ? The
soul goes round upon a wheel of stars and al} things
return; perhaps Strake and I have striven in many

an



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

shapes, beast against beast and bird against bird,
and perhaps we shall strive for ever. But since we
seek and need each other, even that eternal hatred is
an eternal love. Good and evil go round in a wheel
that is one thing and not many. Do you not realize
in your heart, do you not believe behind all your
beliefs, that there is but one reality and we are its
shadows; and that all things are but aspects of one
thing: a centre where men melt into Man and Man
into God ? ”

“ No,” said Father Brown.

Outside, twilight had begun to fall, in that phase
of such a snow-laden evening when the land looks
brighter than the sky. In the porch of the main-
entrance visible through a half-curtained window.
Father Brown could dimly see a bulky figure stand-
ing. He glanced casually at the French windows
through which he had originally entered, and saw
they were darkened with two equally motionless
figures. The inner door with the coloured glass
stood slightly ajar; and he could see in the short
corridor beyond, the ends of two long shadows,
exaggerated and distorted by the level light of
evening, but still like grey caricatures of the figures
of men. Dr. Boyne had already obeyed his tele-
phone message. The house was surrounded.

” What is the good of saying no,” insisted his
host, still with the same hypnotic stare. You have
seen part of that eternal drama with your own eyes.

SIS



The Dagger with Wings

You have seen the threat of John Strake to slay
Arnold Aylmer by black magic. You have seen
Arnold Aylmer slay John Strake by white magic.
You see Arnold Aylmer alive and talking to you
now. And yet you do not believe it.”

” No, I do not believe it,” said Father Brown,
and rose from his chair like one terminating a visit.

“ Why not ? ” asked the other.

The priest only lifted his voice a little, but it
sounded in every corner of the room like a bell.

“ Because you are not Arnold Aylmer,” he
said. “ I know who you are. Your name is
John Strake; and you have murdered the last -of
the brothers, who is lying outside in the snow.”

A ring of white showed round the iris of the
other man’s eyes; he seemed to be making, with
bursting eyeballs, a last effort to mesmerize and
master his companion. Then he made a sudden
movement sideways; and even as he did so the door
behind him opened and a big detective in plain
clothes put one hand quietly on his shoulder.
The other hand hung down, but it held a revolver.
The man looked wildly round, and saw plif^
clothes men in all corners of the quiet room.

That evening Father Brown had another and
longer conversation with Dr. Boyne about the
tragedy of the Aylmer fomily. By that time there
was no longer any doubt of the central fact of the
case, for John Strake had confessed his identity

»*3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

and even confessed his crimes; only it would be
truer to say that he boasted of his victories. Com-
pared to the fact that he had rounded off his life’s
work with the last Aylmer lying dead, everything
else, including existence itself, seemed to be in-
different to him.

'* The man is a sort of monomaniac,” said
Father Brown. ” He is not interested in any other
matter; not even in any other mmder. I owe hm)
something for that; for I had to comfort myself
with the reflection a good many times this after-
noon. As has doubtless occurred to you, instead
of weaving all that wild but ingenious romance
about winged vampires and silver bullets, he might
have put an ordinary leaden bullet into me, and
walked out of the house. I assure you it occurred
quite frequently to me.”

“ I wonder why he didn’t,” observed Boyne.
“ I don’t imderstand it; but 1 don’t understand
anything yet. How on earth did you discover it,
and what in the world did you discover ? ”

” Oh, you provided me with very valuable infor-
fl(|^on,” replied Father Brown modestly, “especially
the one piece of information that really counted.
I mean the statement that Strake was a very inven-
tive and imaginative liar, vdth great presence of
mind in producing his lies. This afternoon he
needed it; but he rose to the occasion. Perhaps his
only mistake waajn choosing a preternatural story;

**4



The Dagger with Wings

he had the notion that because 1 am a clergyman I
should believe anything. Many people have little
notions of that kind.*’

“ But I can’t make head or tail of it,” said the
doctor. ” You must really begin at the beginning.”

” The beginning of it was a dressing-gown,”
said Father Brown simply. ” It was the one really
good disguise I’ve ever known. When you meet
a man in a house with a dressing-gown on, you as-
sflme quite automatically that he’s in his own house.

I assumed it myself; but afterwards queer little
things began to happen. When he took the pistol
down he clicked it at arm’s length, as a man does
to make sure a strange weapon isn’t loaded; or
course he would know whether the pistols in hb
own 1^1 were loaded or not. I didn’t like the way
he looked for the brandy, or the way he nearly
barged into the bowl of fishes. For a man who has
a fragile thing of that sort as a fixture in his rooms
gets a quite mechanical habit of avoiding it. But
these things might possibly have been fimcies; the
first real point was this. He came out from the
little passage between the two doors; and in thal
passage there’s only one other door leading to a
room; so I assumed it was the bedroom he had just
come from. 1 tried the handle; but it was locked.
I thought this odd; and looked tiuwugh the key-
hole. It was an utterly bare tooon, obviously
<leserted; no bec^no anydiing. Thenfoce he had

SIS



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

not come from inside any room, but from outside
the house. And when I saw that, I think 1 saw the
whole picture.

“ Poor Arnold Aylmer doubtless slept and per-
haps lived upstairs, and came down in his dressing-
gown and passed through the red glass door. At
the end of the passage, black against the winter
daylight, he saw the enemy of his house. He saw
a tall bearded man in a broad-brimmed black hjit
and a large flapping black cloak. He did not see
much more in this world. Strake sprang on him,
throttling or stabbing him; we cannot be sure till
the inquest. Then Strake, standing in the narrow
passage between the hat-stand and the old sideboard,
and looking down in triumph on the last of his foes,
heard something he had not expected. He heard
footsteps in the parlour beyond. It was myself
entering by the French windows.

“ His masquerade was a miracle of promptitude.
It involved not only a disguise but a romance; an
impromptu romance. He took off his big black hat
and cloak and put on the dead man’s dressing-gown.
Then he did a rather grisly thing; at least a thing
that aflfects my fancy as more grisly than the rest.
He hung the corpse like a coat on one of the haN
pegs. He draped it in his own long cloak, and
found it hung well below the heels; he coveted the
head entirely with his own wide hat. It was the
only possible way of hiding it in Jhat little passage

si6



The Dagger with Wings

with the locked door; but it was really a very clever
one. I myself walked past the hat-stand once with-
out knowing it was anything but a hat-stand. I
think that inconsciousness of mine will always give
me a shiver.

“ He might perhaps have left it at that; but
I might have discovered the corpse at any minute;
and, hung where it was, it was a corpse calling for
what you might call an explanation. He adopted
the bolder stroke of discovering it himself and ex-
plaining it himself.

** Then there dawned on this strange and fright-
fully fertile mind the conception of a story of sub-
stitution ; the reversal of the parts. He had already
assumed the part of Arnold Aylmer. Why should
not his dead enemy assume the part of John Strake ?
There must have been something in that topsy
turveydom to take the fuicy of that darkly fancifiil
man. It was like some frightful fiuicy dress ball
to which the two mortal enemies were to go dressed
up as each other. Only, the fancy dress ball was
to be a dance of death; and one of the dancers
would be dead. That is why I can imagine that
man putting it in his own mind; and I can imagine
him smiling.”

Father Brown was gazing into vacancy with his
large grey eyes, which, when not blurred by his
trick of blinl^g, were the one nobble thing in his
face. He went on speaking simply and seriously.

• sty



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

“ All things are from God; and above all reason
and imagination and the great gifts of the mind.
They are good in themselves; and we must not
altogether forget their origin even in their perver-
sion. Now this man had in him a very noble power
to be perverted; the power of telling stories. He
was a great novelist; only he had twisted his Active
power to practical and to evil ends; to deceiving
men with false fact instead of with true Action.
It began with his deceiving old Aylmer with elab-
orate excuses and ingeniously detailed lies; but even
that may have been, at the beginning, little more
than the tall stories and tarradiddles of the child
who may say equally he has seen the King of Eng-
land or the King of the Fairies. It grew strong in
him through the vice that perpetuates all vices,
pride; he grew more and more vain of his prompti-
tude in producing stories, of his originality and sub-
tlety in -developing them. That is what the young
Aylmers meant by saying that he could always cast
a spell over their father; and it was true. It was the
sort of spell that the story-teller cast over the tyrant
in the Anbian Nights. And to the last he walked
the world with the pride of a poet; and with the
fslse yet unfathomable courage of a great liar.
He could always produce more Arabian Nights
if ever his neck was in danger. And to-day his
neck was in danger.

But I am sure, as I say, that he enjoyed it as
at8



The Dagger with Wings

a fantasy as well as a conspiraqr. He set about
the task of telling the true story the wrong way
round; of treating the dead man as living and the
live man as dead. He had already got into Aylmer’s
dressing-gown; he proceeded to get into Aylmer’s
body and soul. He looked at the corpse as if it
were his own corpse lying cold in the snow. Then
he spread-eagled it in that strange fashion to suggest
the sweeping descent of a bird of prey, and decked
it out not only in his own dark and flying garments
but in a whole dark fairy-tale about the black bird
that could only fall by the silver bullet. I do not
know whether it was the silver glittering on the side-
board or the snow shining beyond the door that
suggested to his intensely artistic temperament
the theme of white magic and the white metal used
against magicians. But whatever its origin, he
made it his own like a poet; and did it very promptly,
like a practical man. He completed the exchange
and reversal of parts by flinging the corpse out on to
the snow as the corpse of Strake. He did his best
to work up a creepy conception of Strake as some-
thing hovering in the air everywhere, a harpy with
wings of spe^ and claws of death; to explain the
absence of footprints and other things. For one
piece of artistic impudence I hugely admire him.
He actually turned one of the contradictions in
his case into an argument for it; and said that the
man’s doak being too long for him proved that he



The Incredulity of Father Brown

never walked on the ground like an ordinary mortal.
But he looked at me very hard while he said that;
and something told me that he was at that moment
trying a very big bluff.”

Dr.- Boyne looked thoughtful. “Had you
discovered the truth by then ? ” he asked. “ There
is something very queer and close to the nerves,
I think, about notions affecting identity. I don’t
know whether it would be more weird to get a guess
like that swiftly oi slowly. I wonder when you
suspected and when you were sure.”

“ I think 1 really suspected when I telephoned
to you,” replied his friend. “ And it was nothing
more than the red light from the closed door bright-
ening and darkening on the carpet. It looked like
a splash of blood that grew vivid as it cried for
vengeance. Why should it change like that ?
I knew the sun had not come out; it could only be
because the second door behind it had been opened
and shut on the garden. But if he had gone out
and seen his enemy then, he would have raised the
alarm then; and it was some time afterwards that
the fracas occurred. I began to feel he had gone
out to do something ... to prepare something
. . . but as to when I was certain, that is a different
matter. I knew that right at the end he was trying to
hypnotize me, to master me by the black art of eyes
like talismans and a voice like an incantation.
That’s what he used to do with old Aylmer, no

aao



The Dagger with Wings

doubt. But it wasn’t only the way .he said it, it
was what he said. It was the religion and philo>
sophy of it.”

“ I’m afraid I’m a practical man,” said the doctor
with gruff humour, ” and I don’t bother much about
religion and philosophy.”

“ You’ll never be a practical man till you do,”
said Father Brown. “ Look here, doctor ; you know
me pretty well; I think you know I’m not a
bigot. You know I know there are all sorts
in all religions; good men in bad ones and bad men
in good ones. But there’s just one little fact I’ve
learned simply as a practical man, an entirely prac>
tical point, that I’ve picked up by experience, like
the tricks of an animal or the trademark of a good
wine. I’ve scarcely • ever met a criminal who
philosophized at all, who didn’t philosophize along
those lines of orientalism and recurrence and rein-
carnation, and the wheel of destiny and the serpent
biting its own tail. I have found merely in practice
that there is a curse on the servants of that serpent;
on their belly shall they go and the dust shall they
eat; and there was never a blackguard or a pro-
fligate born who could not talk that sort of spiritu-
ality. It may not be like that in its real religious
origins; but here in our working world it is the
religion of rascals; and I knew it was a rascal who
was speaking.”

” Why,” said Boyne, ” I should have thought



The Incredulity of Father Brown

that a rascal could pretty well profess any religion he
chose."

“ Yes," assented the other, " he could profess
any religion; that is he could pretend to any religion,
if it was all a pretence. If it was mere mechanical
hypocrisy and nothing else, no doubt it could be
done by a mere mechanical hypocrite. Any sort
of mask can be put on any sort of face. Anybody
can learn certain phrases or state verbally that he
holds certain views. I can go out into the street
and state that I am a Wesle)ran Methodist or a
Sandemanian, though I fear in no very convincing
accent. But we are talking about an artist; and for
the enjoyment of the artist the mask must be to
some extent moulded on the face. What he makes
outside him must correspond to something inside
him; he can only make his effects out of some of
the materials of his soul. I suppose he could have
^aid he was a Wesleyan Methodist; but he could
never be an eloquent Methodist as he can be an
eloquent mystic and fatalist. I am talking of the
sort of ideal such a man thinks of if he re^ly tries
to be idealistic. It was his whole game with me
to be as idealistic as possible; and whenever that is
attempted by that sort of man, you will generally
find it is that sort of ideal. That sort of man may
be dripping with gore; but he will always be able
to tell you quite sincerely that Buddhism is better
than Christianity. Nay, he will tell you quite

•ta



The Dagger with Wings

sincerely that Buddhism is more Christian than
Christianity. That alone is enough to throw a
hideous and ghastly ray of light on his notion of
Christianity.”

“ Upon my soul,” said the doctor, laughing,
“ I can’t make out whether you’re denouncing or
defending him.”

” It isn’t defending a man to say he is a genius,”
said Father Brown. “ Far from it. And it is
simply a psychological fact that an artist will betray
himself by some sort of sincerity. Leonardo (U
Vinci cannot draw as if he couldn’t draw. Even
if he tried, it will always be a strong parody of a weak
thing. This man would have made something much
too fearful and wonderful out of the Wesleyan
Methodist.”

When the priest went forth again and- set his
face homeward, the cold had grown more intense
and yet was somehow intoxicating. The trees
stood up like silver candelabra of some incredible
cold candlemas of purification. It was a piercing
cold, like that silver sword of pure pain that once
pierced the very heart of piuity. But it was not a
killing cold, save in the sense of seeming to kill all
the mortal obstructions to our immortal and im-
measurable vitality. The pale green sky of twilight,
with one star like the star of Bethlehem, seemed by
some strange contradiction to be a cavern of clarity.
It was as if there could be a green fiimaoe cS cold



The Incredulity of Father Brown

which wakened all things to life like warmth, and
that the deeper they went into those cold crystalline
colours the more were they' light like winged crea-
tures and clear like coloured glass. It tingled with
truth and it divided truth from error with a blade
like ice; but all that was left had never felt so much
alive. It was as if all joy were a jewel in the heart
of an iceberg. The priest hardly understood his
own mood as he advanced deeper and deeper into
the green gloaming, drinking deeper and deeper
draughts of that virginal vivacity of the air. Some
forgotten muddle and morbidity seemed to be left
behind, or wiped out as the snow had painted out
the footprints of the man of blood. As he shuffled
homewards through the snow, he muttered to him-
self, “ And yet he is right enough about there
being a white magic, if he only knows where to
look for it.”



VII

THE DOOM OF THE DARNAWAYS


Two landscape-painters stood looking at one land-
scape, which was also a seascape, and both were
curiously impressed by it, though their impressions
were not exactly the same. To one of them,
who was a rising artist from London, it was new as
well as strange. To the other, who was a local
artist, but with something more than a local celebrity,
it was better known ; but perhaps all the more strange
for what he knew of it.

In terms of tone and form, as these men saw
it, it was a stretch of sands against a stretch of sun-
set, the whole scene lying in strips of sombre colour,
dead green and bronze and brown and a drab that
was not merely dull but in that gloaming in some
way more mysterious than gold. All that broke
these level lines was a long building which ran out
from^ the fields into the sands of the sea, so that
its fringe of dreary weeds and rushes seemed almost
to meet the seaweed. But its most singular feature
that the upper part of it had the ragged out-
lines of a ruin, pierced by so many udde window*
and large rents as to be a mere dark skeleton against
the dying light; trixile the lower bulk of the building

"5



The Incredulity of Father Brown

had hardly any windows at all, most of4hem being
blind and bricked up and their outlines only hiintly
traceable in the twilight. But one window at least
was still a window ; and it seemed strangest of all
that it showed a light.

“ Who on earth can live in that old shell ? ”
exclaimed the Londoner, who was a big, bohemian>
looking man, young but with a shaggy red beard
that made him look older ; Chelsea knew him famil-
liarly as Harry Payne.

“ Ghosts, you might suppose,” replied his friend
Martin Wood. ” Well, the people who live there
really are rather like ghosts.”

It was perhaps rather a paradox that the London
artist seemed almost bucolic in his boisterous fresh-
ness and wonder, while the local artist seemed a
more shrewd and experienced person, regarding
him with mature and amiable amusement ; indeed,
the latter was altogether 'a quieter and more con-
ventional figure, wearing ^rker clothes and with
his square and stolid face cl^-shaven.

” It is only a sign of the times, of course,” he
went on, ” or of the passing of old times and old
fiunilies with them. The last of the great Darna-
ways live in that house; and not many of the new
poor are as poor as they are. They can’t even aflfbrd
to make their own top-story habitable; but have to
Bve in the lower rooms of a ruin, like b«t8 and owls.
Yet they have fiunOy portraits that go back to the

ss6



The Doom of the Damaways

Wars of the Roses and the first portrait-painting in
England, and very fine some of them are; 1 happen to
know, because they asked for my professional advice
in overhauling them. There’s one of them especi-
ally, and one of the earliest, but it’s so good that it
gives you the creeps.”

” The whole place gives you the creeps, I
should think by the look of it,” replied Payne.

” Weil,” said his friend, ” to tell you the truth
it does.”

The silence that followed was stirred by a
faint rustle among the rushes by the moat; and
it gave them, rationally enough, a slight nervous
start when a dark figure brushed along the
bank, moving rapidly and almost like a startled
bird. But it was only a man walking briskly with
a black bag in his hand; a man with a long' sallow
face and sharp eyes that glanced at the London
stranger in a slightly dvkling and suspicions
manner.

“ It’s only Dr. Barnet,” said Wood with a sort
of relief. “ Good evening, Doctor. Are you going
up to the house ? I hope nobody’s ill.”

” Everybody’s always ill in a place like tha^”
growled the doctor, “only sometimes they’re too
ill to know it. The very air of the place is a blight
and a pestilence. 1 don’t envy the yoxmg man ftcm
Austrdia.”

“ And who,” asked Payne abruptly and rathor
say



The Incredulity of Father Brown

absently, “ may the young man from Australia
be?’»

“ Ah 1 ” snorted the doctor, “ hasn’t your
friend told you about him ? As a matter of f^ct
I believe he is arriving to-day. Quite a romance
in the old style of melodrama: the heir coming back
from the colonies to his ruined castle, all complete
even down to an old family compact for his marrying
the lady watching in the ivied tower. Queer old
stuff, isn’t it ? but it really happens sometimes.
He’s even got a little money, which is the only bright
spot there ever was in this business.”

” What does Miss Darnaway herself, in her ivied
tower, think of the business ? ” asked Martin Wood
dryly.

” What she thinks of everything else by this
time,” replied the doctor. " They don’t think
in this weedy old den of superstitions; they only
dream and drift. I think she accepts the family
contract and the colonial husband as part of the
Doom of the Darnaways, don’t you know. I
really think that if he turned out to be a hump-
backed negro with one eye and a homicidal mania,
she would only think it added a finishing touch and
fitted in with the twilight scenery.”

” You’re not giving my friend from London
a very lively picture of my friends in the country,”
said Wood, laughing. ” I had intended taking him
there to call; no artist ought to miss those Darnaway

ss8



The Doom of the Damaways

portraits if he gets the chance. But perhaps I’d
better postpone it if they’re in the middle of the
Australian invasion.”

” Oh, do go in and see them, for the Lord’s
sake,” said Dr. Barnet warmly. ” Anything that
will brighten their blighted lives will make my task
easier. It will need a good many colonial cousins
to cheer things up, I should think; and the more the
merrier. Come, I’ll take you in myself.”

As they drew nearer to the house it was seen to
be isolated like an island in a moat of brackish water
which they crossed by a bridge. On the other side
spread a fairly wide stony floor or embankment
with great cracks across it, in which little tvifts of
weed and thorn sprouted here and there. This
rock platform looked large and bare in the grey
twilight; and Payne could hardly have believed
that such a corner of space could have contained so
much of the soul of a wilderness. This platform
only jutted out on one side, like a giant door-step,
and beyond it was the door; a very low-browed
Tudor archway standing open but dark, like a cavoi

When the brisk doctor led them inside without
ceremony, Payne had, as it were, another shock of
depression. He could have expected to find him-
self mounting to a very ruinous tower, by very narrow
winding staircases; but in this case the first steps
into die house were actually steps downwards.
They went down several short ana broken stairways

"9



The Incredulity of Father Brown

into large twilit rooms which, but for their lines
of dark pictures and dusty book-shelves, might have
been the traditional dungeons beneath the castle
moat. Here and there a candle in an old candle-
stick lit up some dusty accidental detail of a dead
elegance; but the visitor was not so much impressed,
or depressed, by this artificial light as by the one pale
gleam of natural light. As he passed down the
long room he saw the only window in that wall,
a curious low oval window of a late-seventeenth
century fashion. But the strange thing about it
was that it did not look out directly on any space
of sky but only on a reflection of sky; a pale strip
of daylight merely mirrored in the moat, under the
hanging shadow of the bank. Payne had a memory
of the Lady of Shallot who never saw the world
outside except in a mirror. The lady of this Shallot
not only in some sense saw the world in a mirror,
but even saw the world upside-down.

“ It's as if the house of Darnaway were falling
literally as well as metaphorically," said Wood in a
low voice, “ as if it were sinking slowly into a swamp
or a quicksand; tmtil the sea goes over it like a
green roof.”

Even the sturdy Dr. Barnet started a little at
the silent approach of the figure that came to receive
them. Indeed, the room was so silent that they
were all startled to realize that it was not empty.
There were three people in it when they entered;

SJO



The Doom of the Damawe^s

three dim figures motionless in the dim room;
all three dressed in black and looking like dark
shadows. As the foremost figure drew nearer
the grey light from the window, he showed a £sce
that looked almost as grey as its frame of hair.
This was old Vine, the steward, long left in loco
parentis since the death of that eccentric parent,
the last Lord Darnaway. He would have been a
handsome old man if he had had no teeth. As it was
he had one, which showed every now and then
and gave him a rather sinister appearance. He re-
ceived the doctor and his friends with a fine coiurtesy
and escorted them to where the other two figures in
black were seated. One of them seemed to Payne
to give another appropriate touch of gloomy
antiqxiity to the castle by the mere fact of being a
Roman Catholic priest, who might have come out of
a priest’s hole in the dark old days. Payne could
imagine him muttering prayers or telling beads or
tolling bells or doing a ntunber of indistinct and
melancholy things in that melancholy place. Just
then he might be supposed to have been giving
religious consolation to the lady ; but it could hardly
be supposed ^t the consolation was very consoling,
or at any rate that it was very cheering. For the
rest, the priest was personally insignificant enough,
with plain and rather expressionless features; but
the lady was a very dififerent matter. Her face was
very bx from bei^ [dain or insignificant; it stood

iSi



The Incredulity of Father Brown

out from the darkness of her dress and hair and
background mth a pallor that was almost awful, but
a beauty that was almost awfully alive. Payne looked
at it as long as he dared; and he was to look at it a
good deal longer before he died.

Wood merely exchanged with his friends such
pleasant and polite phrases as would lead up to his
purpose of revisiting the portraits. He apologized
for calling on the day which he heard was to be one
of family welcome; but he was soon convinced that
the family was rather mildly relieved to have visitors
to distract them or break the shock. He did not
hesitate, therefore, to lead Payne through the central
reception-room into the library beyond, where hung
the portrait, for there was one which he was especi-
ally bent on showing, not only as a picture but almost
as a puzzle. The little priest trudged along with
them; he. seemed to know something about old
pictures as well as about old prayers.

“ I’m rather proud of having spotted this,”
said Wood. “ I believe it’s a Holbein. If it isn’t,
there was somebody living in Holbein’s time who
was as great as Holbein.”

It was a portrait in the hard but sincere and
living fiishion of the period, representing a man clad
in black trimmed with gold and fiir, with a heavy,
full, rather pale face but watchful eyes.

” What a pity art couldn’t have stopped for ever
at just that transition stage,” cried Wood, ** and



The Doom of the Damam^s

never transitioned any more. Don’t you see it’s just
realistic enough to be real ? Don’t you see the fiice
speaks all the more because it stands out from a rather
stiffer framework of less essential things ? And the
eyes are even more real than the face. On my soul,
I think the eyes are too real for the face I It’s just
as if those sly, quick eyeballs were protruding out
of a great pale mask.”

” The stiffness extends to the figure a little,
I think,” said Payne. ” They hadn’t quite mastered
anatomy when medisevalism ended, at least in the
north. That left leg looks to me a good deal out
of drawing.”

“ I’m not so sure,” replied Wood quietly.
” Those fellows who painted just when ^-ealism
began to be done, and before it began to be overdone,
were often more realistic than we think. They put
real details of portraiture into things that are thought
merely conventional. You might say this fellow’s
eyebrows or eye-sockets are a little lop-sided;
but I bet if you knew him you’d find that one
of his eyebrows did really stick up more than
the other. And I shouldn’t wonder if he was lame
or something, and that black leg was meant to
be crooked.”

“ What an old devil he looks I ” burst out
Payne suddenly. ” I trust his reverence will excuse
my language.”

” I believe in the devil, thank you,” said die

» 133



TJu Incredulity of Father Brown

pRest with an inscrutable face. “ Curiously enough
there was a legend that the devil was lame.’*

“ I say,” protested Pa3^e, “ you can’t really
mean that he was the devil; but who the devil
was he ? ”

“ He was the Lord Darnaway under Henry
VII and Henry VIII,” replied his companion.
” But there are curious legends about him too; one
of them is referred to in that inscription round the
frame, and further developed in some notes left by
somebody in a book I found here. They are botf
rather curious reading.”

Payne leaned forward, craning his head so a
to follow the archaic inscription roimd the frame.
Irving out the antiquated lettering and spelling,
It seemed to be a sort of rhyme running somewhat
thus :

In the seventh heir I shall return^

In the seventh hour 1 shall depart^

None in that hour shall hold my hand^

And we to her that holds my heart.

“ It sounds creepy somehow,” said Payne,
“ but that may be partly because I don’t understand
a word of it.”

” It’s pretty creepy even when you do,” said
Wood in a low voice. ” The record made at a later
date, in the old book I found, is all about how this
beauty deliberately killed himself in such a way

*34



The Doom of the Darnaw^

that his wife was executed for his murder. Another
note commemorates a later tragedy, seven succes-
sions later, under the Georges, in which another
Darnaway committed suicide, having first thought-
fully left poison in his wife’s wine. It’s said that
both suicides took place at seven in the evening.
I suppose the inference is that he does really return
with every seventh inheritor and makes things
pleasant, as the rhyme suggests, for any lady unwise
enough to marry him.”

” On that argument,” replied Payne, ” it would
be a trifle uncomfortable for the next seventh
gentleman.”

Wood’s voice was lower still as he said :

“ The new heir will be the seventh.”

Harry Payne suddenly heaved up his great chest
and shoulders like a man flinging off a burden.

“ What crazy stuff are we all talking ? ” he
cried. ” We're all educated men in an enlightened
age, I suppose. Before I came into this damned
dank atmosphere I’d never have believed I should
be talking of such things, except to laugh at them.”

“ You are right,” said Wood. ** If you lived
long enough in this underground palace you’d
beg^ to feel diflferently about things. I’ve begun
to feel very curiously about that picture, having
had so much to do with handling and hanging it.
It sometimes seems to me that the painted flfiM is
more alive than the dead fitces of the people'lmng

S3S



JKe Incredulity of Father Brown

here; that it is a sort of talisman or magnet: that it
commands the elements and draws out the destinies
of men and things. I suppose you would call it very
fanciful."

" What is that noise ? " cried Payne suddenly.

They all listened, and there seemed to be no
noise except the dull boom of the distant sea; then
they began to have the sense of something mingling
with it; something like a voice calling through the
sound of the surf, dulled by it at first, but coming
nearer and nearer. The next moment they were
certain; someone was shouting outside in the dusk.

Payne turned to the low window behind him
and bent to look out. It was the window from which
nothing cotild be seen except the moat with its
reflection of bank and sky. But that inverted vision
was not the same that he had seen before. From
the hanging shadow of the bank in the water
depended two dark shadows reflected from the feet
and legs of a figure standing above upon the bank.
Through that limited aperture they could see
nothing but the two legs black against the reflection
of a pale and livid sunset. But somehow that very
fact of the head being invisible, as if in the clouds,
gave something dreadful to the sound that followed;
the voice of a man crying aloud what they could not
properly hear or understand. Payne especially
was peenng out of the litde window with an altered
fkce, and he spoke with an altered voice :

*36



The Doom of the Damawam

“ How queerly he’s standing I ”

" No, no,” said Wood, in a sort of soothing
whisper. “ Things often look like that in reflec-
tion. It’s the wavering of the water that makes you
think that.”

” Think what ? ” asked the priest shortly.

“ That his left leg is crooked,” said Wood.

Payne had thought of the oval window as a sort
of mystical mirror; and it seemed to him that there
were in it other inscrutable images of doom. There
was something else beside the figure that he did not
understand; three thinner legs showing in dark lines
against the light, as if some monstrous three-legged
spider or bird were standing beside the stranger.
Then he had the less crazy thought of a tripod Uke
that of the heather oracles; and the next moment
the thing had vanished and the legs of the human
figure passed out of the picture.

He turned to meet the pale fiice of old Vine the
steward, with his mouth open, eager to speak,
and his single tooth showing.

“ He has come,” he said. “ The boat arrived
from Australia this morning.”

Even as they went back out of the library into
the central salon, they heard the footsteps of the
new-comer clattering down the entrance steps, with
various items of light luggage trailed behind him.
When Payne saw one of them, he laughed with a
reaction of relief. His tripod was nothing but the

*37



23 ^ Incredulity of Father Brown

telescopic legs of a portable camera, easily packed
and tmpacked; and the man who was carrying it
seemed so far to take on equally solid and normal
qualities. He was dressed in dark clothes, but of
a careless and holiday sort ; his shirt was of grey
flannel, and his boots echoed uncompromisingly
enough in those still chambers. As he strode forward
to greet his new circle his stride had scarcely more
than the suggestion of a limp. But Payne and his
companions were looking at his face, and could
scarcely take their eyes from it.

He evidently felt there was something curious
and uncomfortable about his reception; but they
could have sworn that he did not himself know the
cause of it. The lady supposed to be in some sense
already betrothed to him was certainly beautiful
enough to attract him; but she evidently also fright-
ened him. The old steward brought him a sort
of feudal homage, yet treated him as if he were the
fiunily ghost. The priest still looked at him with a
face which was quite indecipherable, and therefore
perhaps all the more unnerving. A new sort of
irony, more like the Greek irony, began to pass over
Payne's mind. He had dreamed of the stranger
as a devil, but it seemed almost worse that he was an
unconscious destiny. He seemed to march towards
crime with the monstrous innocence of CEdipus.
He had approached the flunily mansion in so blindly
buoyant a spirit as to have set up his camera to

•38



The Doom of the Damawoft

photograph his first sight of it; and even the camera
had taken on the semblance of the tripod of a
tragic pythoness.

Payne was surprised, when taking his leave
a little while after, at something which showed that
the Australian was already less unconscious of his
surroundings. He said in a low voice:

“ Don’t go ... or come again soon. You
look like a hiunan being. This place fairly gives
me the jumps.”

When Payne emerged out of those almost sub-
terranean halls and came into the night air and the
smell of the sea, he felt as if he had come out of that
underworld of dreams in which events tumble on
top of each other in a way at once unrestful and un-
real. The arrival of the strange relative had been
somehow unsatisfying and as it were unconvincing.
The doubling of the same face in the old portrait
and the n^ arrival troubled him like a two-headed
monster. And yet it was not altogether a night-
mare; nor was it that face, perhaps, that he saw
most vividly.

“ Did you say ? ” he asked of the doctor, as
they strode together across the striped dark sands
by the darkening sea, “ Did you say that young min
was betrothed to Miss D^away by a family
compact or something ? Sounds rather like a
novd.”

** But an historical novel,” answered Dr. Barnet.

•»



The Incredulity of Father Brown

" The Darnaways all went to sleep a few centuries
ago, when things were really done that we only read
of in romances. Yes, I believe there’s some family
tradition by which second or third cousins always
marry when they stand in a certain relation of age,
in order to unite the property. A damned silly
tradition, I should say; and if they often married
in and in, in that fashion, it may account on prin-
ciples of heredity for their having gone so rotten."

“ I should hardly say," answered Payne a little
stiffly, “ that they had all gone rotten."

" Well," replied the doctor, “ the young man
doesn’t look rotten, of course, though he’s certainly
lame.”

*‘ T^je young man 1 ” cried Payne, who was sud-
denly and unreasonably angry. ** W ell, if you think
the young lady looks rotten, I think it’s you who have
rotten taste."

The doctor’s face grew dark and bitter. " I
fancy I know more about it than you do," he snapped.

They completed the walk in silence, each feeling
that he had been irrationally rude and had suffered
equally irrational rudeness ; and Payne was left to
brood alone on the matter, for his friend Wood had
remained behind to attend to some of his business
in connexion with the pictures.

Payne took very full advantage of the invitation
extended by the colonial cousin, who wanted some-
body to cheer him up. During the next few weeks

•¥>



The Doom of the Damaways

he saw a good deal of the dark interior of the Dam-
away home; though it might be said that he did not
confine himself entirely to cheering up the colonial
cousin. The lady’s melancholy was of longer
standing and perhaps needed more lifting; anyhow,
he showed a labo;^ous readiness to lift it. He was
not without a conscience, however, and the situation
made him doubtful and uncomfortable. Weeks
went by and nobody could discover from the de-
meanour of the new Darnaway whether he con-
sidered himself engaged according to the old
compact or no. He went mooning about the dark
galleries and stood staring vacantly at the dark and
sinister picture. The shades of that prison-house
were certainly beginning to close on him, and/there
was little of his Australian assurance m But
Payne could discover nothing upon the point that
concerned him most. Once he attempted to confide
in his friend Martin Wood, as he was pottering
about in his capacity of picture-hanger; but even out
of him he got very little satisfaction.

“ It seems to me you can’t butt in,” said Wood
shortly, “ because of the engagement.”

” Of course I shan’t butt in if there is an engage-
ment,” retorted his friend ; “ but is there ? I
haven’t said a word to her, of course; but I’ve seen
enough of her to be pretty certain she doesn’t
diink there is, even if she thinks there may be.
He doesn’t say there is, or even hint that there



The Incredulity of Father Brown

ought to be. It seems to me this shilly-shallying is
rather unfair on everybody.”

” Especially on you, I suppose,” said Wood a
little harshly. ” But if you ask me. I'll tell you what
I think—I think he's afraid.”

” Afraid of being refused ? ” asked Payne.

” No, afraid of being accepted,” answered the
other. ” Don't bite my head off — I don't mean
afraid of the lady. I mean afraid of the picture."

” Afraid of the picture I " repeated Payne.

” I mean afraid of the curse,” said Wood.
“ Don't you remember the rhyme about the
Darnaway doom falling on him and her.”

” Yes, but look here,” cried Payne. ** Even
the Darnaway doom can’t have it both ways. You
tell me first that I mustn’t have my own way because
of the compact, and then that the compact mustn’t
have its own way because of the curse. But if the
curse can destroy the compact, why should she be
tied to the compact ? If they’re frightened of marry-
ing each other, they’re free to marry anybody else,
and there’s an end of it. Why should I sufiFer
for the observance of something they don’t propose
to observe ? It seems to me your position is very
tmreasonable.”

“ Of course it’s all a tangle,” sa\d Wood rather
crossly, and went on hammering at the frame of a
canvas.

Suddenly, one morning, the new hdr broke his
a4a



The Doom of the Damawafs

long and baffling silence. He did it in a curious
^hion, a little crude, as was his way, but with an
obvious anxiety to do the right thing. He asked
frankly for advice, not of this or that individual as
Payne had done, but collectively as of a crowd.
When he did speak, he threw himself on the whole
company, like a statesman going to the country.
He called it “ a show-down.” Fortunately the
lady was not included in this large gesture; and
Payne shuddered when he thought of her feelings.
But the Australian was quite honest; he thought
the natural thing was to ask for help and for infor-
mation, calling a sort of family council at which he
put his cards on the table. It might be said that
he flung down his cards on the table, for he .did it
with a rather desperate air, like one who had been
harassed for days and nights by the increasing
pressure of a problem. In that short time the
shadows of that place of low windows and sinking
pavements had curiously changed him and increased
a certain resemblance that crept through all their
memories.

The five men, including the doctor, were sitting
round a table; and Payne was idly reflecting that
his own light tweeds and red hair must be the only
coloun in the upom, for the priest and the steward
were in'Uack and Wood and Damaway habitually
wore dark gr^ suits that looked almost like bkck.
Perhaps this incongruity had been what the young

»43



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

man had meant by calling him a human being.
At that moment the young man himself turned
abruptly in his chair and began to talk. A moment
after the dazed artist knew that h6 was talking about
the most tremendous thing in the world.

*' Is there anything in it P ” he was saying.

That is what I've come to asking myself till
I’m nearly crazy. I’d never have believed 1 should
come to thinking of such things; but I think of the
portrait and the rhyme and the coincidences or
whatever you call them, and 1 go cold. Is there
anything in it ? Is there any Doom of the Darn-
aways or only a damned queer accident ? Have
I got a right to marry, or shall I bring something
big and black out of the sky, that I know nothing
about, on myself and somebody else ? ”

His rolling eye had roamed round the table and
rested on the plain face of the priest, to whom he now
seemed to be speaking. Payne’s submerged prac>
ticality rose in protest against the problem of super-
stition being brought before that supremely super-
stitious tribunal. He was sitting next to Darnaway
and struck in before the priest could answer.

“ Well, the coincidences are curious, I admit,'*’
he said, rather forcing a note of cheerfulness;
“ but surely we—” and then he stopped as if he
had been struck by lightning. For Darnaway had
turned his head sharply over his shoulder at the in-
terruption, and with the movement his left eyebrow



The Doom of the Damaways

jerked up far above its fellow and for an instant
the face of the portrait glared at him with a ghastly
exaggeration of exactitude. The rest saw it; and
all had the aii:-9£Jll|ving been dazzled by an instant
of light. The old steward gave a hollow groan.

“ It is no good,” he said hoarsely; “ we are
dealing with something too terrible.”

“ Yes,” assented the priest in a low voice,
“ we are dealing with something terrible; with the
most terrible thing I know; and the name of it is
nonsense.”

“ What did you say ? ” said Darnaway, stil
looking towards Um.

” I said nonsense,” repeated the priest. “ I
have not said anything in particular up to now, for
it was none of my business; I was only taking tem-
porary duty in the neighbourhood and Miss Darn-
away wanted to see me. But since you’re asking
me personally and point-blank, why, it’s easy enough
to answer. Of course there’s no Doom of the Dam-
aways to prevent your marrying anybody you have
any decent reason for marrying. A man isn’t fated
to fsdl into the smallestvenial sin, let alone into crimes
like suicide and murder. You can’t be made to do
wicked things against your will because your name
is Darnaway, any more than I can becaiise my name
is Brown. The Doom of the Browns,” he added
with relish — ** the Weird of the Browns would sound
even better.”


MS



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ And you of all people,** repeated the Australian,
staring, “ tell me to think like that about it.’*

** I tell you to think about something else,”
replied the priest cheerfully. ” What has become
of the rising art of photography ? How is the
camera getting on ? I know it’s rather dark down-
stairs, but those hollow arches on the door above
could easily be turned into a first-rate photographic
studio. A few workmen could fit it out with a
glass roof in no time.”

“ Really,” protested Martin Wood, “ I do think
you should be the last man in the world to tinker
about with those beautiful Gothic arches, which are
about the best work your own religion has ever done
in the world. I should have thought you’d have
had some feeling for that sort of art; but I can’t
see why you should be so uncommonly keen on
photography.”

“ I’m uncommonly keen on daylight,” answered
Father Brown, “especially in this dingy business;
and photography has the virtue of depending on
daylight. And if you don’t know that I would
grind all the Gothic arches in the world to powder
to save the sanity of a single human soul, you don’t
know so much about my religion as you think
you do.”

The young Australian had sprung to his feet
like a nuui rejuvenated. *' By C^rge 1 that’s the
talk,” he cried, ** though I never thought to hear



The Doom of the Damaways

it from that quarter. 1*11 tell you what, reverend
sir, I’ll do something that will show I haven’t lost
my courage after all.”

The old steward was still looking at him with
quaking watchfulness, as if he felt something fey
about the young man’s defiance. " Oh,” he cried,
” what are you going to do now ? ”

“ I am going to photograph the portrait,”
replied Darnaway.

Yet it was barely a week afterwards that the
storm of the catastrophe seemed to stoop out of the
sky, darkening that sun of sanity to which the priest
had appealed in vain, and plunging the mansion
once more in the darkness of the Darnaway doom.
It had been easy enough to fit up the new studio;
and seen from inside it looked very like any other
such studio, empty except for the fullness of the
white light. A man coming from the gloomy
rooms below had more than normally the sense of
stepping into a more than modern brilliancy,
as blank as the future. At the suggestion of Wood,
who knew the casde well and had got over his
first aesthetic grumblings, a small room remaining
intact in the upper ruins was easily turned into a dark
room, into which Darnaway went out of the white
daylight to grope by the crimson gleams of a red
lamp. Wood said, laughing, that the red lamp
had reconciled him to the vandalism; as that blood*
shot darkness was as romantic as an alchemist’s cave.

*47



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Darnaway had risen at daybreak on the day that
he meant to photograph the mysterious portrait;
and had it carried up from the library by the single
corkscrew staircase that connected the two floors.
There he had set it up in the wide white daylight
on a sort of easel and planted his photographic
tripod in front of it. He said he was anxious to send
a reproduction of it to a great antiquary who had
written on the antiquities of the house; but the
others knew that this was an excuse covering much
deeper things. It was, if not exactly a spiritual
duel between Darnaway and the demoniac picture,
at least a duel between Darnaway and his own
doubts. He wanted to bring the daylight of
photography face to face with that dark master*
piece of painting; and to see whether the sunshine
of the new art would not drive out the shadows of
the old.

Perhaps this was why he preferred to do it by
himself, even if some of the details seemed to take
longer and involve more than normal delay. Any-
how, he rather discouraged the few who visited
his studio during the day of the experiment, and
who found him focusing and fussing about in a very
isolated and impenetrable hishion. The steward
had left a meal for him, as he refused to come down;
the old gentleman also returned some hours after-
wards and found the meal more or less normally
disposed of; but when he brought it he got no more



The Doom of the Darnaways

gratitude than a grunt. Payne went up once to see
how he was getting on, but finding the photographer
disinclined for conversation came down again.
Father Brown had wandered that way in an unob-
trusive style, to take Darnaway a letter from the
expert to whom the photograph was to be sent.
But he left the letter in a tray, and whatever he
thought of that great glass-house full of daylight
and devotion to a hobby, a world he had himself in
some sense created, he kept it to himself and came
down. He had reason to remember very soon that
he was the last to come down the solitary staircase
connecting the floors, leaving a lonely man and an
empty room behind him. The others were standing
in the salon that led into the library; just undw the
great black ebony clock that looked like a titanic
coffin.

“ How was Darnaway getting on,** asked
Payne, a little later, “ when you last went up ? **
The priest passed a hand over his forehead.
“ Don’t tell me I’m getting psychic,” he said with
a sad smile. “ I believe I’m quite dazzled with
daylight up in that room and couldn’t see things
straight. Honestly, I felt for a flash as if there
were something uncanny about Darnaway’s figure
standing before that portrait.**

** Oh, that’s the lame leg,” said Barnet promptly.
“ We know all about that.”

“Do you know,” said Payne abruptly, but

e



The Incredulity of Father Brown

lowering his voice, “ I don’t think we do know all
about it or anything about it. What’s the matter
with his leg ? What was the matter with his an-
cestor’s leg ? ”

“ Oh, there’s something about that in the book
I was reading, in there, in the family archives,”
said Wood; ” I’ll fetch it for you.” And he stepped
into the library just beyond.

“ I think,” said Father Brown quietly, “ Mr.
Payne must have some particular reason for asking
that.”

” I may as well blurt it out once and for all,” said
Payne, but in a yet lower voice. ” After all, there
is a rational explanation. A man from anywhere
might have made up to look like the portrait.
What do we know about Darnaway ? He is
behaving rather oddly—”

The others were staring at him in a rather
startled fashion; but the priest seemed to take it
very calmly.

'* I don’t think the old portrait’s ever been
photographed,” he said. ” That’s why he wants
to do it. I don’t think there’s anything odd about
that.”

” Quite an ordinary state of things, in fut,”
said Wood with a smile; he had just returned
with the book in his hand. And even as he spoke
there was a stir in the clockwork of the great dark
dock behind him and successive strokM thrilled



The Doom of the Damaways

through the room up to the number of seven.
With the last stroke there came a crash from the
floor above that shook the house like a thunderbolt;
and Father Brown was already two steps up the
winding staircase before the sound had ceased.

“ My God 1 ” cried Payne involuntarily, “ he
is alone up there."

" Yes," said Father Brown without turning as
he vanished up the stairway. " We shall find
him alone."

When the rest recovered from their first par-
alysis and ran helter-skelter up the stone steps and
found their way to the new studio, it was true in
that sense that they found him alone. They found
him lying in a wreck of his tall camera, with its
long splintered legs standing out grotesquely
at three diflPerent angles; and Damaway had fidlen
on top of it with one black crooked leg lying at a
fourth angle along the floor. For the moment the
dark heap looked as if he were entangled with some
huge and horrible spider. Little more than a glance
and a touch were needed to tell them that he was
dead. Only the portrait stood untouched upon
the easel, and one could fiuicy the smiling eyes
shone.

An hour afterwards Father Brown, in helping
to calm the confusion of the stricken household,
came upon the old steward muttering almost as
mechanically as the clock had ticked and struck

* 5 *



The Incredulity of Father, Brown

the terrible hour. Almost without hearing themj
he knew what the muttered words must be.

In the seventh heir I shall return
In the seventh hour I shall depart.

As he was about to say something soothing,
the old man seemed suddenly to start awake and
stifFen into anger; his mutterings changed to a
fierce cry.

“ You I ” he cried, “ you and your daylight !
Even you won’t say now there is no doom for the
Darnaways.”

My opinion about that is unchanged,” said
Father Brown mildly.

Then after a pause be added, ” I hope you will
observe poor Darnaway’s last wish, and see the
photograph is sent ofiF.”

” The photograph 1 ” cried the doctor sharply.
“ What’s the good of that ? As a matter of fact,
it’s rather curious; but there isn’t any photograph
It seems he never took it after all, after pottering
about all day.”

Father Brown swung round sharply. ” Then
take it yourselves,” he said. “ Poor Darnaway
was perfectly right. It’s most important that the
photograph should be taken.”

As all the visitors, the doctor, the priest and the
two artists trailed away in a black and dismal proces*

•5»



The Doom of the Darnaways

sion across the brown and yellow sands, they were
at first more or less silent, rather as if they had
been stunned. And certainly there had been some>
thing like a crack of thunder in a clear sky about the
fulfilment of that forgotten superstition at the very
time when they had most forgotten it; when the
doctor and the priest had both filled their minds
with rationalism as the photographer had filled his
rooms with daylight. They might be as ration-
alistic* as they liked; but in broad daylight the
seventh heir had returned, and in broad ^ylight
at the seventh hour he had perished.

“ I’m afraid everybody will always believe in the
Darnaway superstition now,” said Martin Wood.

” I know one who won’t,” said the doctor
sharply. ” Why should I indulge in superstition
because somebody else indulges in suicide ? ”

” You think poor Mr. Darnaway committed
suicide ? ” asked the priest.

” I’m siu’e he committed suicide,” replied the
doctor.

” It is possible,” agreed the other.

“ He was quite alone up there, and he
had a whole drug-store of poisons in the dark
room. Besides, it’s just the sort of thing that
Darnaways do.”

” You don’t think there’s anything in the ful-
filment of the fiumly curse P ”

” Yes,” said the doctor, ” I believe in one fiunily

as3



The Incredulity of Father Brown

curse, and that is the £unily constitution. I told
you it was heredity, and they are all half mad. If
you stagnate and breed in and brood in your own
swamp like that, you’re bound to degenerate
whether you like it or not. The laws of heredity
can’t be dodged; the truths of science can’t be denied.
The minds of the Darnaways are filing to pieces
as their blighted old sticks and stones are falling
to pieces, eaten away by the sea and the salt air.
Suicide— of course he committed suicide; T dare-
say all the rest will commit suicide. Perhaps the
best thing they could do.”

As the man of science spoke there sprang
suddenly and with startling clearness into Payne’s
memory the face of the daughter of the Darnaways,
a tragic mask pale against an unfathomable black-
ness, but itself of a blinding and more than mortal
beauty. He opened his mouth to speak and found
himself speechless.

** I see,” said Father Brown to the doctor.
” So you do believe in the superstition after all ? ”

“ What do you mean — ^believe in the super-
stition ? I believe in the suicide as a matter of
scientific necessity.”

“ Well,” replied the priest, ** I don’t see a pin
to choose between your scientific superstition and
the other magical superstition. They both seem
to end in turning people into paralytics, who can’t
move their own legs or arms or save their own lives

•54



The Doom of the Darnaways

or souls. The rhyme ssud it was the doom of the
Darnaways to be killed, and the scientific textbook
says it is the doom of the Darnaways to kill them-
selves. Both ways they seem to be slaves.”

” But 1 thought you said you believed in rational
views of these things,” said Dr. Barnet. ” Don’t
you believe in heredity ? ”

” I said 1 believed in daylight,” replied the
priest in a loud and clear voice, ” and I won’t
choos’e between two tunnels of subterranean super-
stition that both end in the dark. And the proof of
it is this; that you are all entirely in the dark about
what really happened in that house.”

” Do you mean about the suicide ? ” asked
Payne.

” I mean about the murder,” said Father Brown ;
and his voice, though only slightly lifted to a louder
note, seemed somehow to resound over the whole
shore. ” It was murder: but murder is of the will,
which God made free.”

What the others said at the moment in answer
to it Payne never knew. For the word had a rather
curious efiTect on him; stirring him like the blast
of a trumpet and yet bringing him to a halt. He
stood still in the middle of the sandy waste and let
the others go on in front of him; he felt the blood
crawling through all his veins and the sensation
that is called the hair standing on end; and yet he
felt a new and unnatural happiness. A psycho-



The Incredulity of Father Brown

logical process too quick and too complicated for
himself to follow had already reached a conclusion
that he could not analyse; but the conclusion was
one of relief. After standing still for a moment
he turned and went back slowly across the sands
to the house of the Darnaways.

He crossed the moat with a stride that shook
the bridge, descended the stairs and traversed
the long rooms with a resounding tread, till he came
to the place where Adelaide Darnaway sat haloed
with the low light of the oval window, almost like
some forgotten saint left behind in the land of death.
She looked up, and an expression of wonder made
her face yet more wonderful.

“ What is it ? ” she said. “ Why have you
come back ? ”

“ I have come fbr the Sleeping Beauty,” he
said in a tone that had the resonance of a laugh.
“ This old house went to sleep long ago, as the doctor
said; but it is silly for you to pretend to be old.
Come up into the daylight and hear the truth.
I have brought you a word; it is a terrible word,
but it breaks the spell of your captivity.”

She did not understand a word he said; but
something made her rise and let him lead her down
the long hall and up the stairs and out under the
evening sky. The ruins of a dead garden stretched
towards the sea; and an old fountain with the figure
of a triton, green vdth rust, remained poised there,

356



The Doom of the Darnaways

pouring nothing out of a dried horn into an empty
basin. He had often seen that desolate outline
against the evening sky as he passed, and it had
seemed to him a type of fdlen fortunes in more
ways than one. Before long, doubtless, those
hollow fonts would be filled, but it would be with
the pale green bitter waters of the sea and the fiowers
would be drowned and strangled in seaweed.
So, he had told himself, the daughter of the Darn-
aways might indeed be wedded, but she would
be wedded to death and a doom as deaf and ruthless
as the sea. But now he laid a hand on the bronze
triton that was like the hand of a giant, and shook
it as if he meant to hurl it over like an idol or an evil
god of the garden.

** What do you mean ? ’* she asked steadily.
“ What is this word that will set tis free ? ”

“ The word is murder," he said, “ and the
freedom it brings is as fresh as the flowers of spring.
No; 1 do not mean I have murdered anybody.
But the fact that anybody can be murdered is itself
good news, after the evil dreams you have been living
in. Don't you understand ? In that dream of
yours everything that happened to you came from
inside you; the doom of the Darnaways was stored
up in the Darnaways; it unfolded itself like a horrible
flower. There was no escape even by happy
accident; it was all inevitable; whether it was
Vine and his old-wives’ tales or Barnet and his new-

*57



The Incredulity of Father Brown

fimgled heredity. But this man who died was not
the Ancdm of a mag^c curse or an inherited madness.
He was murdered; and for us that murder is simply
an accident; yes, requieseat in pace^ but a happy
accident. It is a ray of daylight, because it comes
from outside."

She suddenly smiled. “ Yes, I believe 1
understand. I suppose you are talking like a
lunatic; but I understand. But who murdered
him ? ”

“ I do not know,” he answered calmly, “ but
Father Brown knows. And as Father Brown says,
murder is at least done by the will, free as that wind
from the sea."

" Father Brown is a wonderful person," she
said after a pause; " he was the only person who
ever brightened my existence in any way at all
until ”

“ Until what ? " asked Payne, and made a
movement almost impetuous, leaning towards her
and thrusting away the bronze monster so that it
seemed to rock on its pedestal.

" Well, until you did," she said and smiled
again.

So was the sleeping palace awakened, and it is
no part of this story to describe the stages of its
awakening, though much of it had come to pass
before the dark of that evening had fallen upon
the shore. As Harry Payne strode homewards

ssS



The Doom of the Darnaways

once more, across those dark sands that he had
crossed in so many moods, he was at the highest
turn of happiness that is given in this mortal life,
and the whole red sea within him was at the top of
its tide. He would have had no difficulty in pic-
turing all that place again in flower, and the bronze
triton bright as a golden god and the fountain flowing
with water or with wine. But all this brightness
and blossoming had been unfolded for him by the
one word “ murder,” and it was still a word that he
did not understand. He had taken it on trust,
and he was not unwise; for he was one of those
who have a sense of the sound of truth.

It was more than a month later that Payne
returned to his London house to keep an appoint-
ment with Father Brown, taking the required
photograph with him. His personal romance had
prospered as well as was fitting under the shadow
of such a tragedy, and the shadow itself therefore
lay rather more lightly on him; but it was hard to
view it as anything but the shadow of a family
fatality. In many ways he had been much occupied,
and it was not until the Darnaway household had
resumed its somewhat stern routine and the portrait
had long been restored to its place in the library
that he had managed to photograph it with a mag-
nesium flare. B^re sending it to the antiquary,
as originally arranged, he brought it to the priest
who had so pressingly demanded it.

«59



The Incredidity of Father Brown

“ I can't understand your attitude about all
this, Father Brown,” he said. . ” You act as if you
had already solved the problem in some way of your
own.”

The priest shook his head mournfully. ” Not
a bit of it,’” he answered. ” I must be very stupid
but I’m quite stuck; stuck about the most practical
point of all. It’s a queer business; so simple up to
a point, and then ' Let me have a look at that
photograph, will you ? ”

He held it close to his screwed, short-sighted
eyes for a moment, and then said, ” Have you got
a magnifying glass ? ”

Payne produced one, and the priest looked
through it intently for some time and then said,
” Look at the title of that book at the edge of the
bookshelf beside the frame; it’s The History of Pope
Joan, Now, I wonder . . . yes, by George; and
the one above is something or other of Iceland.
Lord I what a queer way to find it out 1 What a
dolt and donkey I was not to notice it when I was
there 1 ”

” But what have you fotmd out ? ” asked Payne
impatiently.

” The last link,” said Father Brown, “ and I’m
not stuck any longer. Yes, I think I know how
that unhappy story went from first to last now.”

” But why ? ” insisted the other.

” Why, because,” said the priest with a smile,
ate



The Doom of the Damaways

“ the Darnaway library contained books about Pope
Joan and Iceland, not to mention another I see with
the title beginning The Religton of Frederick^ which
is not so very hard to fill up.” Then, seeing the
other’s annopnce, his smile kded and he said more
earnestly:

“ As a matter of fact, this last point, though it is
the last link, is not the main business. There were
much more curious things in the case than that.
One of them is rather a curiosity of evidence. Let
me begin by saying something that may surprise
you. Darnaway did not die at seven o’clock that
evening. He had been already dead for a whole
day.”

“ Surprise is rather a mild word,” said Payne
grimly, ” since you and I both saw him walking
about afterwards.”

” No, we did not,” replied Father Brown quietly.
“ I think we both saw him, or thought we saw him,
fussing about with the focusing of his camera.
Wasn’t his head under that black cloak when you
passed through the room ? It was when I did.
And that’s why I felt there was something queer
about the room and the figure. It wasn’t that the
leg was crooked, but rather that it wasn’t crooked.
It was dressed in the same sort of dark clothes;
but if you see what you believe to be one man stand-
ing in the way that another man stands, you will
diink he’s in a strange and strained attitude.”

«6i



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Do you really mean,” cried Payne with some-
thing like a shudder, ” that it was some unknown
man ? ”

” It was the murderer,” said Father Brown.
” He had already killed Darnaway at daybreak and
hid the corpse and himself in the dark room —
an excellent hiding-place, because nobody normally
goes into it or can see much if he does. But he let
it fall out on the floor at seven o’clock, of course,
that the whole thing might be explained by the
curse.”

” But I don’t understand,” observed Payne.
” Why didn’t he kill him at seven o’clock, then,
instead of loading himself with a corpse for fourteen
hours ? ”

“ Let me ask you another question,” said the
priest. “ Why was there no photograph taken ?
Because the murderer made sure of killing him when
he first got up, and before he could take it. It was
essential to the murderer to prevent that photo-
graph reaching the expert on the Darnaway
antiquities.”

There was a sudden silence for a moment, and
then the priest went on in a lower tone :

” Don’t you see how simple it is ? Why, you
yourself saw one side of the possibility; but it’s
simpler even than you thought. You said a nuin
might be &ked to resemble an old picture. Surely
it’s simpler that a picture should be fidced to re-



The Doom of the Darncfuoays

semble a man. In plain words, it’s true in a rather
special way that there was no Doom of the Dahi-
aways. There w^ no old picture; there was no
old rhyme; there was no legend of a man who caused
his wife’s death. But there was a very wicked
and a very clever man who was willing to cause
another man’s death in order to rob him of his
promised wife.”

The priest suddenly gave Payne a sad smile,
as if in reassurance. “ For the moment'! believe
you thought I meant you,” he said, ” but you were
not the only person who haunted that house for
sentimental reasons. You know the man, or rather
you think you do. But there were depths in the
man called Martin Wood, artist and antiquary,
which none of his mere artistic acquaintances were
likely to guess. Remember that he was called in
to criticize and catalogue the pictures; in an aris-
tocratic dust-bin of that sort that practically means
simply to tell the Darnaways what art treasures they
had got. They would not be surprised at things
turning up they had never noticed before. It had
to be done well, and it was; perhaps he was right
when he said that if it wasn’t Holbein it was some-
body of the same genius.”

” 1 feel rather stunned,” said Payne, ” and there
sretwenty things I don’t see yet. How did he know
what Darnaway looked like ? How did he actually
kill him ? the doctors seem rather puzzled at present.”

S63



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ I saw a photograph the lady had which the
Australian sent on before him/’ said the priest,
and there are several ways in which he could have
learned things when the new heir was once recog-
nized. We may not know these details; but they
are not difficulties. You remember he used to help
in the dark room; it seems to me an ideal place, say,
to prick a man with a poisoned pin, with the poisons
all handy. No, I say these were not difficulties.
The difficulty that stumped me was how Wood
could be in two places at once. How could he take
the corpse from the dark-room and prop it against
the camera so that it would fall in a few seconds,
without coming downstairs, when he was in the
library looking out a book ? And I was such a fool
that I never looked at the books in the library;
and it was only in this photograph, by very un-
deserved good luck, that I saw the simple fact of a
book about Pope Joan.”

” You’ve kept your best riddle for the end,’
said Payne grimly. ” What on earth can Pope
Joan have to do with it ? ”

” Don’t forget the book about the Something
of Iceland,” advised the priest, ” or the religion of
somebody called Frederick. It only remains to
a«k what sort of a man was the late Lord Dam-
away.”

” Oh, does it ? ” observed Payne heavily.

“ He was a cultivated, humorous sort of eccen-
*64



Th& Doom of the Darnaways

trie, I believe,” went on Father Brown. “ Being
cultivated, he knew there was no such person as
Pope Joan. Being humorous, he was very likely
to have thought of the title of * The Snakes of
Iceland ' or something else that didn’t exist. I
venture to reconstruct the third title as The Religion
of Frederick the Great — ^which also didn’t exist.
Now, doesn’t it strike you that those would be just
the titles to put on the backs of books that didn’t
exist; or in other words on a book-case that wasn’t
a book-case ? ”

“ Ah,” cried Payne, ” I see what you mean
now. There was some hidden staircase ”

” Up to the room Wood himself selected as a
dark room,” said the priest nodding. ” I’m sorry.
It couldn’t be helped. It’s dreadfully banal and
stupid, as stupid as I have been on this pretty banal
case. But we were mixed up in a real musty old
romance of decayed gentility and a fallen hunily
mansion; and it was too much to hope that we
could escape having a secret passage. It was a
priest’s hole; and I deserve to be put in it.”


&


S65



VIII

THE GHOST OF GIDEON WISE

Father Brown always regarded the case as the
queerest example of the theory of an alibi ; the theory
by which it is maintained, in defiance of the mytho-
logical Irish bird, that it is impossible for anybody
to be in two places at once. To begin with, James
Byrne, being an Irish journalist, was perhaps the
nearest approximation to the Irish bird. He came
as near as anybody could to being in two places at
once; for he was in two places at the opposite
extremes of the social and political world within
the space of twenty minutes. The first was in the
Babylonian halls of the big hotel, which was the
meeting place of the three commercial magnates
concerned with arranging for a coal lock-out and
denouncing it as a coal strike; the second was in a
curious tavern, having the facade of a grocery store,
where met the more subterranean triumvirate of
those who would have been very glad to turn the
lock-out into a strike— and the strike into a revo-
lution. The reporter passed to and fro between
the three millionaires and the three Bolshevist
leaders with the immunity of the modem herald
or the new ambassador.

a66



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

He found the three mining magnates hidden
in a jungle of flowering plants and a forest of fluted
and florid columns of gilded plaster; gilded bird>
cages hung high under the painted domes amid the
highest leaves of the palms; and in them were birds
of motley colours and varied cries. No bird in
the wilderness ever sang more unheeded and no
flower ever wasted its sweetness on the desert air
more completely than the blossoms of those tall
plants wasted theirs upon the brisk and breathless
business men, mostly American, who talked and
ran to and fro in that place. And there, amid a riot
of rococo ornament that nobody ever looked at,
and a chatter of expensive foreign birds that nobody
ever heard, and a mass of gorgeous upholstery and
a labyrinth of luxurious architecture, the three’ men
sat and talked of how success was founded on
thought and thrift and a vigilance of economy and
self-control. One of them indeed did not tdk so
much as the others; but he watched with very bright
and motionless eyes, which seemed to be pinched
together by his pince-nez, and the permanent smile
under his small black moustache was rather like
a permanent sneer. This was the famous Jacob
P. Stein, and he did not speak till he had something
to say. But his companion, old Gallup the Penn-
sylvanian, a huge flit fellow with reverend grey hair
but a face like a pugilist, talked a great d^. He
was in a jovial mood and was half rallying,

*67



The Incredulity of Father Brown

bullying the third millionaire, Gideon Wise, a
hard, dried, angular old bird of the type that his
coimtrymen compare to hickory, with a stiff grey
chin-beard and the manners and clothes of any old
fiu’mer from the central plains. There was an old
argument between Wise and Gallup about combina-
tion and competition. For old Wise still retained,
with the manners of the old backwoodsman, some-
thing of his opinions of the old individualist; he
belonged, as we should say in England, to the
Manchester School; and Gallup was always trying
to persuade him to cut out competition and pool
the resources of the world.

“ You’ll have to come in, old fellow, sooner or
later,” Gallup was saying genially as Byrne entered.
” It’s the way the world is going, and we can’t go
back to the one man business now. We’ve all got
to stand together.”

” If I might say a word,” said Stein, in his
tranquil way, “ I would say there is something a
little more urgent even than standing together
commercially. Anyhow, we must stand together
politically; and that’s why I’ve asked Mr. Byrne to
n)eet us here to-day. On the political issue we
must combine; for the simple reason that all our
most dangerous enemies are already combined.”

” Oh, I quite agree about political combination,”
grumbled Gideon Wise.

• ” See here,” said Stein to the journalist; ” I
868



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

know you have the run of these queer places,
Mr. Byrne, and I want you to do something for us
unofficially. You know where these men meet ;
there are only two or three of them that count,
John Elias and Jake Halket, who does all the spout-
ing, and perhaps that poet fellow, Horne.”

“ Why Horne used to be a friend of Gideon,”
said the jeering Mr. Gallup ; ” used to be in his
Sunday School class or something.”

” He was a Christian, then,” said old Gideon
solemnly, “ but when a man takes up with atheists
you never know. I still meet him now and then.
I was quite ready to back him against war and con-
scription and all that, of course, but when it comes
to all the goldarn bolshies in creation ”

” Excuse me,” interposed Stein, ” the matter is
rather urgent, so I hope you will excuse my putting
it before Mr. Byrne at once. Mr. Byrne, I may
tell you in confidence that I hold information, or
rather evidence, that would land at least two of those
men in prison for long terms, in connexion with
conspiracies during the late war. I don't want to
use that evidence. But I want you to go to them
quietly and tell them that I shall use it, and use it
to-morrow, unless they alter their attitude.”

“Well,” replied Byrne, “what you propose
would certainly be called compounding a felony
and might be called blackmail. Don’t you think
it is rather dangerous ? ”

369



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ I think it is rather dangerous for them," said
Stein with a snap, “ And I want you to go and tell
them so.”

“ Oh, very well," said Byrne standing up,
with a half humorous sigh. " It’s all in the day’s
work; but if I get into trouble, I warn you 1 shall
try to drag you into it.”

*‘ You will try, boy,” said old Gallup with a
hearty laugh.

For so much still lingers of that great dream of
Jefferson and the thing that men have called
Democracy, that in his country, while the rich rule
like tyrants, the poor do not talk like slaves; but
there is candour between the oppressor and the
oppressed.

The meeting-place of the revolutionists was a
queer, bare, whitewashed place, on the walls of which
were one or two distorted uncouth sketches in
black and white, in the style of something that was
supposed to be Proletarian Art, of which not one
proletarian in a million could have made head or
tail. Perhaps the one point in common to the two
council chambers was that they both violated the
American G>nstitution by the display of strong drink.
G)cktails of various coloiua had stood before the
three millionaires. Halket, the most violent of the
Bolshevists, thought it only appropriate to drink
vodka. He was a long, hulking^ellow with a mena-
cing stoop, and his very profile was aggressive like a

aTo



The Ghost Gideon Wise

dog’s, the nose and lips thrust out together, the
latter carrying a ragged red moustache and the
whole curling outwards with perpetual scorn.
John Elias was a dark watchful man in spectacles,
w'th a black pointed beard; and he had learnt in
many European caf^s a taste for absinthe. The
journalist's first and last feeling was how very like
each other, after all, were John Elias and Jacob P.
Stein. They were so like in face and mind and
manner, that the millionaire might have disappeared
down a trap-door in the Babylon Hotel and come up
again in the stronghold of the Bolshevists.

The third man also had a curious taste in drinks;
and his drink was symbolic of him. For what stood
in front of the poet Horne was a glass of milk, and
its very mildness seemed in that setting to 'have
something sinister about it, as if its opaque and
colourless colour were of some leprous paste more
poisonous than the dead sick green of absinthe.
Yet in truth the mildness was so far genuine enough ;
for Henry Horne came to the camp of revolution
along a very different road and from very different
origins from those of Jake, the common tub-
thumper, and Elias, the cosmopolitan wire-puller.
He had had what is called a careful upbringing,
had gone to chapel in hi^ childhood, and carried
through life a teetotalism which he could not shake
off when he cast away such trifles as Christianity
and marriage. He had fair hair and a fine face

• 7 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

that might have looked like Shelley, if he had not
weakened the chin with a little foreign fringe of
beard. Somehow the beard made him look more
like a woman; it was as if those few golden hairs
were all he could do.

When the journalist entered, the notorious
Jake was talking, as he generally was. Horne had
uttered some casual and conventional phrase about
“ Heaven forbid ” something or other, and this
was quite enough to set Jake off with a torrent of
profanity.

“ Heaven forbid; and that’s about all it bally
well does do,” he said. ** Heaven never does any-
thing but forbid this, that and the other; forbids
us to strike, and forbids us to fight, and forbids us
to shoot the damned usurers and blood-suckers
where they sit. Why doesn’t Heaven forbid them
something for a bit f Why don’t your damned
priests and parsons stand up and tell the truth about
these brutes for a change ? Why doesn’t their
precious God ”

Elias allowed a gentle sigh, as of faint fatigue,
to escape him.

” Priests,” he said, ” belonged, as Marx has
shown, to the feudal stage of economic development
and are therefore no longer really any part of the
problem. The part once played by the priest
is now played by the capitalist expert and———”

” Yes,” interrupted the journalist, with his
aya



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

grim and ironic impartiality, “ and it’s about time
you knew that some of them are pretty expert in
playing it.” And without moving his own eyes
from the bright but dead eyes of Elias, he told him
of the threat of Stein.

“ I was prepared fonsomething of that sort,” said
the smiling Elias without moving, ” I may say
quite prepared.”

“ Dirty dogs 1 ” exploded Jake. ” If a poor
man said a thing like that, he’d go to penal servi-
tude. But I reckon they’ll go somewhere worse
before they guess. If they don’t go to hell, I don’t
know where the hell they’ll go to - ”

Horne made a movement of protest, perhaps
not so much at what the man was saying as at what
he was going to say, and Elias cut the speech short
with cold exactitude.

” It is quite vinnecessary for us,” he said,
looking at Byrne steadily through his spectacles,
to bandy threats with the other side. It is quite
sufficient that their threats are quite ineffective
so far as we are concerned. We also have made all
our oWn arrangements, and some of them will not
appear imtil they appear in action. So ffir as we
are concerned, an immediate rupture and an extreme
trial of strength will be quite according to plan.”

As he spoke in a quite quiet and dignified
fashion, something in his motionless yellow face
end his great goggles started a fiunt fear creeping up

873



The Incredulity of Father Browm

the journalist’s spine. Halket’s savage fice might
seem to have a snarl in its very silhouette, when
seen sideways; but when seen face to face, the smoul-
dering rage in his eyes had also something of anxiety,
as if the ethical and economic riddle were after all
a little too much for him; and Horne seemed even
more hung on wires of worry and self-criticism.
But about this third man with the goggles, who
spoke so sensibly and simply, there was something
uncanny; it was like a dead man talking at the table

As Byrne went out with his message of defiance,
and passed along the very narrow passage beside
the grocery store, he found the end of it blocked by
a strange though strangely familiar figure; short
and sturdy and looking rather quaint when seen
in dark outline with its round head and wide hat.

“ Father Brown 1 ” cried the astonished journ-
alist. “ I think you must have come into the wrong
door. You’re not likely to be in this little con-
spiracy.”

” Mine is a rather older conspiracy,” replied
Father Brown smiling, “ but it is quite a widespread
conspiracy.”

Well,” replied Byrne, “ you can’t imagine
any of the people here being within a thousand
miles of your concern.”

“ It’s not always easy to tell,” replied the priest
equably, ” but as a matter of fact, there is one
person here who’s within an inch of it.”

874



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

He disappeared into the drk entrance and the
journalist went on his way very much puzzled.
He was still more puzzled by a small incident that
happened to him as he turned into the hotel to make
his report to his capitalist clients. The bower of
blossoms and bird-cages in which those crabbed
old gentlemen were enbosomed was approached by
a flight of marble steps, flanked by gilded nymphs
and tritons. Down these steps ran an active young
man with black hair, a snub nose and a flower in his
buttonhole, who seized him and drew him aside
before he could ascend the stair.

“ I say,” whispered the young man, I’m
Potter— old Gid’s secretary, you know; now be-
tween ourselves, there is a sort of a thunderbolt
being forged, isn’t there, now ? ”

“ I came to the conclusion,” replied Byrne
cautiously ” that the Cyclops had something on the
anvil. But always remember that the Cyclops is a
giant, but he has only one eye. I think Bolshevism
is—”

While he was speaking the secretary listened
with a face that had a certain almost Mongolian
immobility, despite the liveliness of his legs and his
attire. But when Byrne said the word “ Bol-
shevism,” the young man’s sharp eyes shifted and
he said quickly, ” What has that— oh yes, that sort
of thunderbolt; so sorry, my mistake. So easy to
say anvil wheA you mean ice-box.”

*75



The Incredulity of Father Brown

With which the extraordinary young man dis*
appeared down the steps and Byrne continued to
mount them^ more and more mystification clouding
his mind.

He found the group of three augmented to
four by the presence of a hatchet-faced person with
very thin straw-coloured hair and a monocle, who
appeared to be a sort of adviser to old Gallup,
possibly his solicitor, though he was not definitely
so called. His name was Nares, and the questions
which he directed towards Byrne referred chiefly,
for some reason or other, to the number of those
probably enrolled in the revolutionary organization.
Of this, as Byrne knew little, he said less; and the
four men eventually rose from their seats, the last
word being with the man who had been most silent.

“ Thank you, Mr. Byrne,” said Stein, folding up
his eyeglasses. ” It only remains to say that every-
thing is ready; on that point I quite agree with Mr.
Elias. To-morrow before noon the police will have
arrested Mr. Elias, on evidence I shall by then have
put before them, and those three at least will be in
jail before night. As you know, I attempted to
avoid this course. I think that is all, gentlemen.”

But Mr. Jacob P. Stein did not lay his formal
information next day, for a reason that has often
interrupted the activities of such industri^ charac-
ters. He did not do it because he happened to be
dead; and none of the rest of the programme was

276



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

carried out, for a reason which Byrne found dis-
played in gigantic letters when he opened his morn-
ing paper: “ Terrific Triple Murder: Three
Millionaires Slain in One Night.” Other exclama-
tory phrases followed in smaller letters, only about
four times the size of normal type, which insisted
on the special feature of the mystery: the fact that
the three men had been killed not only simultan-
eously but in three widely separated places— Stein
in his artistic and luxurious country seat a hundred
miles inland. Wise outside the little bungalow on
the coast where he lived on sea breezes and the
simple life, and old Gallup in a thicket just outside
the lodge-gates of his great house at the other end
of the country. In all three cases there could be no
doubt about the scenes of violence that had preceded
death, though the actual body of Gallup was not
found till the second day, where it hung huge and
horrible amid the broken forks and branches of the
little wood into which its weight had crashed, like
a bison rushing on the spears; while Wise had clearly
been flimg over the cliff into the sea, not without a
struggle, for his scraping and slipping footprints
could still be traced upon the very brink. But the
first signal of the tragedy had been the sight of his
large limp straw hat, floating far out upon the waves
and conspicuous from the cliffs above. Stein’s
body also had at first eluded search, till a fiaint trail
of blood led the investigators to a bath on the ancient

art



The Incredulity of Father Brown

Roman model he had been constructing in his
garden; for he had been a man of an experimental
turn of mind with a taste for antiquities.

Whatever he might think, Byrne was bound to
admit that there was no legal evidence against any-
body as things stood. A motive for murder was
not enough. Even a moral aptitude for murder
was not enough. And he could not conceive that
pale young pacifist, Henry Horne, butchering
another man by brutal violence, though he might
imagine the blaspheming Jake and even the sneer-
ing Jew as capable of anything. The police and the
man who appeared to be assisting them (who was
no other than the rather mysterious man with the
monocle, who had been introduced as Mr. Nares)
realized the position quite as clearly as the journalist.
They knew that at the moment the Bolshevist con-
spirators could not be prosecuted and convicted, and
that it would be a highly sensational failure if they
were prosecuted and acquitted. Nares started with
an artful candour by calling them in some sense to the
council, inviting them to a private conclave and
asking them to give their opinions freely in the in-
terests of hxunanity. He had started his investi-
gations at the nearest scene of tragedy, the bungalow
by the sea; and Byrne was permitted to be present
at a curious scene, which was at once a peaceful
parley of diplomatists and a veiled inquisition or
putting of suspects to the question. Rather to

ayS



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

Bfrne's surprise the incongruous company, seated
round the table in the seaside bungalow, included
the dumpy figme and owlish head of Father Brown,
though his connexion with the affair did not appear
until some time afterwards. The presence of young
Potter, the dead man’s secretary, was more natural;
yet somehow his demeanour was not quite so
natural. He alone was quite familiar with their
meeting-place, and was even in some grim sense
their host; yet he offered little assistance or informa-
tion. His round snub-nosed face wore an expression
more like sulks than sorrow.

Jake Halket as usual talked most; and a man
of his type could not be expected to keep up the
polite fiction that he and his friends were not accused
Young Horne, in his more refined way, tried to
restrain him when he began to abuse the men who
had been murdered; but Jake was always quite as
ready to roar down his ffiends as his foes. In a
spout of blasphemies he relieved his soul of a very
unofficial obituary notice of the late Gideon Wise.
Elias sat quite still and apparently indifiFerent
behind those spectacles that masked his eyes.

“ It would be useless, I suppose,” said Nares
coldly, “ to tell you that your remarks are indecent.
It may affect you more if I tell you they are impru-
dent. You ^ctically admit that you hated the
dead man.”

” Going to put me in quod for that, ate you ? **
*79



The Incredulity of Father Brown

jeered the demagogue. ** All right. Only you’ll
have to build a prison for a million men, if you’re
going to jail all the poor people ' 'ho had reason to
hate Gid Wise. And you know it’s God’s truth
as well as I do.”

Nares was silent; and nobody spoke until Elias
interposed with his clear though faintly lisping
drawl.

“ This appears to me to be a highly unprofitable
discussion on both sides,” he said. ” You have
summoned us here either to ask us for information
or to subject us to cross-examination. If you
trust us, we tell you we have no information. If
you distrust us, you must tell us of what we are
accused, or have the politeness to keep the fact
to yourselves. Nobody has been able to suggest
the faintest trace of evidence connecting any one of
us with these tragedies any more than with the
murder of Julius Caesar. You dare not arrest us,
and you will not believe us. What is the good of
our remaining here ? ”

And he rose, calmly buttoning his coat, his
friends following his example. As they went to-
wards the door, young Horne turned back and faced
the investigators for a moment with his pale,,
fanatical fiice.

” I wish to say,” he said, ” that I went to a filthy
jul during the whole war because I would not
consent to kill a man.”

aSo



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

With that they passed out, and the members
of the group remaining looked grimly at each other.

“ I hardly think," said Father Brown, “ that we
remain entirely victorious, in spite of the retreat."

“ I don’t mind anything," said Nares, " except
being bullyragged by that blasphemous blackguard
Halket. Horne is a gentleman, anyhow. But
whatever they say, I am dead certain they know;
they are in it, or most of them are. They almost
admitted it. They taunted us with not being able
to prove we’re right, much more than with being
wrong. What do you think. Father Brown ? ’’

The person addressed looked across at Nares
with a gaze almost disconcertingly mild and medi-
tative.

“ It is quite true," he said, " that I have formed
an idea that one particular person knows more than
he has told us. But I think it would be well if I
did not mention his name just yet."

Nares’ eyeglass dropped from his eye: and he
looked up sharply. “ This is unofficial so fiur,"
he said. " I suppose you know that at a later stage
if you withhold information, your position may be
serious."

** My position is simple," replied the priest.
" I am here to look after the legitimate interests
of my friend Halket. I think it will be in his in-
terest, under the circumstances, if I tell you I think
he will before long sever his connexion with this

s a8i



The Incredulity of Father Brown

organization, and cease to be a Socialist in that sense.
I have everjr reason to believe he will probably
end as a Githolic.*'

“ Halket I ” exploded the other incredulously.
“ Why, he cursed priests fix>m morning till night I ”

** I don’t think you quite understand that kind
of man,” said Father Brown mildly. “ He cursed
priests for failing (in his opinion) to defy the whole
world for justice. Why should he expect them to
defy the whole world for justice, unless he had
already begun to assume they were — ^what they are ?
But we haven’t met here to discuss the psychology of
conversion. I only mention this because it may
simplify your task — ^perhaps narrow your search."

“ If it’s true, it would jolly well narrow it to that
narrow-&ced rascal Elias — and I shouldn’t wonder,
for a more creepy, cold-blooded, sneering devil
I never saw.”

Father Brown sighed. ” He always reminded
me of poor Stein,” he said, ” in fact 1 think he was
some relation.”

” Oh, I say,” began Nares, when his protest
was cut short by the door being flung open, re-
vealing once more the long loose figure and pale
face of young Horne; but it seemed as if he had not
merely his natural, but a new and unnatural pallor.

” Hullo,” cried Nares, putting up his single eye-
glass, ” why have you come back again ? ”

Home crossed the room rather shakily without
aSa



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

a word and sat down heavily in a chair. Then he
said, as in a sort of daze, “ 1 missed the others . . .
I lost my way. 1 thought I’d better -come back.”

The remains of evening refreshments were on
the table, and Henry Horne, that lifelong Pro-
hibitionist, poured himself out a wine-glassful of
liqueur brandy and drank it at a gulp.

" You seem upset,” said Father Brown.

Horne had put his hands to his forehead and
spoke as from under the shadow of it; he seemed to
be speaking to the priest only, in a low voice.

” I may as well tell you. I have seen a ghost.”

“ A ghost 1 ” repeated Nares in astonishmentk
“ Whose ghost ? ”

” The ghost of Gideon Wise, the master of
this house,” answered Horne more firmly, “ stand-
ing over the abyss into which he fell.”

“ Oh, nonsense 1 ” said Nares; “ no sensible
person believes in ghosts.”

” That is hardly exact,” said Father Brown,
smiling a little. ” There is really quite as good evi-
dence for many ghosts as there is for most crimes.”

” Well, it’s my business to run after the
criminals,” said Nares rather roughly, “ and I
will Inve other people to run away from the
ghosts. If anybody at this time of day chooses to
be frightened of ghosts, it’s his afifair.”

*' I didn’t say I was frightened of them, though
I daresay I might be,” said Father Brown. ” No-

a83



The Incredulity of Father Brown

body knows till he tries. I said 1 believed in them,
at any rate, enough to want to hear more about this
one. What, exactly, did you see, Mr. Horne ? ’’
“ It was over there on the brink of those crumb-
ling cliffs; you know there is a sort of gap or crevice
just about the spot where he was thrown over.
The others had gone on ahead, and I was crossing
the moor towards the path along the cliff. I often
went that way, for I liked seeing the high seas
dash up against the crags. I thought little of it
to-night, beyond wondering that the sea should be
so rough on this sort of clear moonlight night.
I could see the pale crests of spray appear and dis-
appear as the great waves leapt up at the headland.
Thrice I saw the momentary flash of foam in the
moonlight and then I saw something inscrutable.
The fourth flash of the silver foam seemed to be
fixed in the sky. It did not fall; I waited with
insane intensity for it to fall. I fancied I was mad,
and that time had been for me mysteriously arrested
or prolonged. Then I drew nearer, and then 1
think I screamed aloud. For that suspended spray,
like unfallen snowflakes, had fitted together into
a face and a figure, white as the shining leper in a
legend and terrible as the fixed lightning.*’

“ And it was Gideon Wise, you say ? ”

Horne nodded without speech; there was a
silence broken abruptly by Nares rising to his feet;
so abruptly indeed that he knocked a chair wer.

a84



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

“ Oh, this is all nonsense," he said, “ but we*d
better go out and see."

" I won’t go," said Horne with sudden violence.
“ I’ll never wsdk by that path again."

" I think we must all walk by that path to-night,"
said the priest gravely, " though 1 will never deny
it has been a perilous path ... to more people
than one."

" I will not . . . God, how you all goad me,"
cried Horne, and his eyes began to roll in a strange
fashion. He had risen with the rest, but he made
no motion towards the door.

" Mr. Horne,” said Narcs firmly, “ I am a
police officer, and this house, though you may not
know it, is surrounded by the police. I have tried
to investigate in a friendly fashion, but I must in-
vestigate everything, even anything so silly as a
ghost. I must ask you to take me to the spot you
speak of."

There was another silence while Horne stood
heaving and panting as with indescribable fears.
Then he suddenly sat down on his chair again and
said with an entirely new and much more com-
posed voice:

“ I can’t do it. You may just as well know why.
You will know it sooner or later. I killed him."

For an instant there was the stillness of a house
struck by a thunderbolt and full of corpses. Then
the voice of Father Brown sounded in that enor-

a8s



The Incredulity of father Brown

mous silence strangely small like the squeak of a
mouse.

“ Did you kill him deliberately ? ” he asked.

“ How can one answer such a question ? "
answered the man in the chair, moodily gnawing his
finger. “ I was mad, I suppose. He was intoler-
able and insolent, I know. I was on his land and I
believe he struck me; anyhow, we came to a grapple
and he went over the cliff. When I was well away
from the scene it burst upon me that I had done a
crime that cut me off from men; the brand of Cain
throbbed on my brow and my very brain ; I realized
for the first time that I had indeed killed a man.
I knew 1 should have to confess it sooner or later."
He sat suddenly erect in his chair. “ But 1 will say
nothing against anybody else. It is no use asking
me about plots or accomplices — I will say nothing."

“ In the light of the other murders," said Nares,
“ it is difficult to believe that the quarrel was quite
so unpremeditated. Stirely somebody sent you
there ? ”

“ I will say nothing against anybody I worked
with," said Horne proudly. “ I am a murderer,
but I will not be a traitor."

Nares stepped between the man and the door and
called out in an official fashion to someone outside.

" We will all go to the place, anyhow," he said
in a low voice to the secretary, “ but this man must
go in custody."



The GJiost of Gideon Wise

The company generally felt that to go spook-
hunting on a sea-cliff was a very silly anti-climax
after the confession of the murderer. But Nares,
though the most sceptical and scornful of all,
thought it his duty to leave no stone unturned;
as one might say, no grave-stone unturned. For,
after all, that crumbling cliff was the only grave-
stone over the watery grave of poor Gideon Wise.
Nares locked the door, being the last out of the house,
and followed the rest across the moor to the cliff;
when he was astonished to see young Potter, the
secretary, coming back quickly towards them, his
face in the moonlight looking white as a moon.

" By God, sir,” he said, speaking for the first
time that night, ” there really is something ^ere.
It — ^it’s just like him.”

“ Why, you’re raving,” gasped the detective.
“ Everybody’s raving.”

” Do you think I don’t know him when I see
him ? ” cried the secretary with singular bitterness.
“ I have reason to.”

“Perhaps,” said the detective sharply, “you
are one of those who had reason to hate him, as
Halket said.”

“Perhaps,” said the secretary; “anyhow, I
know him, and I tell you I can see him standing
there stark suid staring under this hellish moon.”

And he pointed towards the crack in the difl^
where they could already see something that might

*87



The Incredulity of Father. Brown

have been a moonbeam or a streak of foam, but which
was already beginning to look a little more solid.
They had crept a hundred yards nearer, and it was
still motionless; but it looked like a statue in silver.

Nares himself looked a little pale and seemed
to stand debating what to do. Potter was frankly
as much frightened as Horne himself; and even
Byrne, who was a hardened reporter, was rather
reluctant to go any nearer if he could help it. He
could not help considering it a little quaint, there-
fore, that the only man who did not seem to be
frightened of a ghost was the man who had said
openly that he might be. For Father Brown was
advancing as steadily, at his stumping pace, as if
he were going to consult a notice-board.

“ It don’t seem to bother you much,” said Byrne
to the priest, ” and yet I thought you were the only
one who believed in spooks.”

” If it comes to that,” replied Father Brown,
“ I thought you were one who didn’t believe in
them. But believing in ghosts is one thing, and
believing in a ghost is quite another.”

Byrne looked rather ashamed of himself, and
glanced almost covertly at the crumbling headlands
in the cold moonlight which were the haunts of the
vision or delusion.

” I didn’t believe in it till I saw it,” he said.

“ And I did believe in it till I saw it,” said
Father Brown.


a88



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

The journalist stared after him as he went
stumping across the great waste ground that rose
towards the cloven headland like the sloping side
of a hill cut in two. Under the discolouring moon
the grass looked like long grey hair all combed
one way by the wind and seeming to point towards
the place where the breaking cliff showed pale
gleams of chalk in the grey-green turf, and where
stood the pale figure or shining shade that none could
yet understand. As yet that pale figure dominated
a desolate landscape that was empty except for the
black square back and business-like figure of the
priest advancing alone towards it. Then the
prisoner Horne broke suddenly from his captors
with a piercing cry and ran ahead of the priest,
falling on his knees before the spectre.

“ I have confessed,” they heard him crying.
“ Why have you come to tell them I killed you ? ”

” I have come to tell them you did not,” said
the ghost, and stretched forth a hand to him. Then
the kneeling man sprang up with quite a new kind
of scream; and they knew it was the hand of flesh.

It was the most remarkable escape from death
tn recent records, said the experienced detective
and the no less experienced journalist. Yet in a
sense it had been very simple ^er all. Flakes and
shards of the cliff were continually falling away,
and some had caught in the gigantic crevice, so as

*89



The Incredulity of Fcdher. Brown

to form what was really a ledge or pocket in what
was supposed to be a sheer drop through darkness
to the sea. The old man, who was a very tough and
wiry old man, had fallen on this lower shoulder of
rock and had passed a pretty terrible twenty-four
hours in trying to climb back by crags that con-
stantly collapsed under him, but at length formed
by their very ruins a sort of stairway of escape.
This might be the explanation of Horne’s optical
illusion about a white wave that appeared and dis-
appeared, and finally came to stay. But anyhow,
there was Gideon Wise, solid in bone and sinew,
with his white hair and white dusty country clothes
and harsh country features, which were, however,
a great deal less harsh than usual. Perhaps it is
good for millionaires to spend twenty-four hours
on a ledge of rock within a foot of eternity. Anyhow,
he not only disclaimed all malice against the
criminal, but gave an account of the matter which
considerably modified the crime. He declared
that Horne had not thrown him over at all ; that the
continually breaking ground had given wray under
him, and that Horne had even made some movement
as of attempted rescue.

" On that providential bit of rock down there,”
he said solemnly, “ I promised the Lord to forgive
my enemies; and the Lord would think it mighty
mean if I didn’t forgive a little accident like that.”

Horne had to depart under police supervision,
ago



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

of course, but the detective did not disguise from
himself that the prisoner’s detention would prob-
ably be short and his punishment, if any, trifling.
It is not every murderer who can put the murdered
man in the witness-box to give him a testimonial.

“ It’s a strange case,” said Byrne, as the detec-
tive and the others hastened along the cliflF path
towards the town.

“ It is,” said Father Brown. ” It’s no business of
ours ; but I wish you’d stop with me and talk it over.”

There was a silence and then Byrne complied
by saying suddenly, ” I suppose you were thinking
of Horne already, when you said somebody wasn’t
telling all he knew.”

“ When I said that,” replied his friend, ” I was
thinking of the exceedingly silent Mr. Potter,
the secretary of the no longer late or (shall we say)
lamented Mr. Gideon Wise.”

“ Well, the only time Potter ever spoke to me
I thought he was a lunatic,” said Byrne, stfuing,
” but I never thought of his being a criminal. He
said something about it all having to do with an
ice-box.”

“ Yes, I thought he knew something about
it,” said Father Brown reflectively. " I never
said he had anything to do with it. . . . I suppose old
Wise really is strong enough to have climbed out
of that chasm.”

“ What do you mean ? ” asked the astonished
* 9 *



The Incredulity of Father Brown

reporter. “Why, of course he got out of that
chasm; for there he is.“

The priest . did not answer the question but
asked abrupt^^

“ What do you think of Horne ? ’’

“ Well, one can’t call him a criminal exactly,”
answered Byrne. “ He never was at all like any
criminal I ever knew, and IVe had some experience,
and, of course, Nares has had much more. I don’t
think we ever quite believed him a criminal.”

“ And I never believed in him in another capa-
city,” said the priest quietly. “ You may know
more about criminals. But there’s one class of
people I probably do know more about than you
do, or even Nares for that matter. I’ve known quite
a lot of them, and I know their little ways.”

“ Another dass of people,” repeated Byrne,
mystified. “ Why, what class do you know about ? ”
“ Penitents,” said Father Brown.

“ I don’t quite understand,” objected Byrne.
“ Do you mean you don’t believe in his crime ? ”

“ I don’t believe in his confession,” said Father
Brown. “ I’ve heard a good many confessions,
and there was never a genuine one like that. It
was romantic; it was all out of books. Look how
he talked about having the brand of Giin. That’s
out of books. It’s not what anyone wotild feel who
had in his own person done a thing hitherto horrible
to him. Suppose you were an honest derk or

aga



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

shop-boy shocked to feel that for the first time
you’d stolen money. Would you immediately
reflect that your action was the same as that of
Barabbas ? Suppose you’d killed a child in some
ghastly anger. Would you go back through
history, till you could identify your action with
that of an Idumean potentate named Herod ?
Believe me, our own crimes are far too hideously
private and prosaic to make our first thoughts turn
towards historical parallels, however apt. And why
did he go out of his way to say he would not give
his colleagues away ? Even in saying so, he was
giving them away. Nobody had asked him so
far to give away anything or anybody. No; I
don’t think he was genuine, and I wouldn’t .give
him absolution. A nice state of things, if people
started getting absolved for what they hadn’t done.”
And Father Brown, his head turned away, looked
steadily out to sea.

” But I don’t understand what you’re driving
at,” cried Byrne. ” What’s the good of buzzing
round him with suspicions when he’s pardoned ^
He’s out of it anyhow. He’s quite safe.”

Father Brown spun round like a teetotum and
caught his friend by the coat with unexpected and
inexpFicable excitement.

“ That’s it,” he cried emphatically. “ Freeze
on to that 1 He’s quite safe. He’s out of it.
That’s why he’s the key or the whole puzzle.”

*93



The Incredulity of Father Brown

“ Oh, help,’* said Byrne feebly.

“ I mean,” persisted the little priest, ” he’s in
it because he’s out of it. That’s the whole explana-
tion.”

” And a very lucid explanation too,” said the
jotirnalist with feeling.

They stood looking out to sea for a time in
silence, and then Father Brown said cheerfully:

“ And so we come back to the ice-box. Where
you have all gone wrong from the first in this busi-
ness is where a good many of the papers and the
public men do go wrong. It’s because you as-
sumed that there is nothing whatever in the modern
world to fight about except Bol^ievism. This
story has nothing whatever to do with Bolshevism;
except perhaps as a blind.”

“ I don’t see how that can be,” remonstrated
Byrne. ” Here you have the three great million-
aires in that one business murdered ”

“ No 1 ” said the priest in a sharp ringing voice.
“ You do not. That is just the point. You do not
have three millionaires mmdered. You have two
millionaires murdered; and you have the third
millionaire very much alive and kicking and quite
ready to kick. And you have that third millionaire
freed for ever from the threat that was thrown «t his
head before your very face, in playfully polite terms,
and in that conversation you described as taking
place in the hotel. Gallup and Stein threatened

S94



The Ghost of Gideon Wise

the more old-fashioned and independent old huck-
ster that if he would not come into their combine
they would freeze him out. Hence the ice-box, of
course.”

After a pause he went on. “ There is undoubt-
edly a Bolshevist movement in the modern world,
and it must undoubtedly be resisted, though I do
not believe very much in your way of resisting it.
But what nobody notices is that there is another
movement equally modem and equally moving :
the great movement towards monopoly or the
turning of all trades into trusts. That also is a
revolution. That also produces what all revolu-
tions produce. Men will kill for that and against
that, as they do for and against Bolshevism. It has
its ultimatums and its invasions and its executions.
These trust magnates have their courts like kings;
they have their bodyguard and bravos; they have
their spies in the enemy camp. Horne was one of
old Gideon’s spies in one of the enemy camps; but
he was used here against another enemy; the rivals
who were running him for standing out.”

” I still don’t quite see how he was used,”
said Byme, “ or what was the good of it.”

, “ Don’t you see,” cried Father Brown sharply,

“ that tiiey ^ve each other an alibi ? ”

Byme still looked at him a little doubtfully,
though understanding was dawning on his face.

” That’s what I mean,” continued the other,
»95



The Itfcredtility of Father Brown

“ when I say they were in it because they were out
of it. Most people would say they must be out of
the other two crimes, because they were in this
one. As a fact, they were in the other two because '
they were out of this one; because this one never
happened at all. A very queer, improbable sort of
alibi, of course; improbable and therefore impenc*
trable. Most people would say a man who con-
fesses a murder must be sincere; a man who forgives
his murderer must be sincere. Nobody wouldr*
think of the notion that the thing never happened, ,
so that one man had nothing to forgive and the other
nothing to fear. They were fixed here for that
night by a story against themselves. But they were '
not here that night; for Horne was miudering oldj
Gallup in the wood while Wise was strangling that^
little Jew in his Roman bath. That’s why I ask
whether Wise was really strong enough for the
climbing adventure.”

” It was quite a good adventure,” said Byrne
regretfully. ” It fitted into the landscape and was,
really very convincing.”

“ Too convincing to convince,” said Father]
Brown, shaking his head. *‘ How very vivid wasl
that moonlit foam flung up and turning to a ghost.
And how very literary 1 Horne is a sneak* and a
skunk, but do not forget that, like many other
sneaks and skunks in history, he is also a poet.”

Piiiim BY Casibu. ft CoKBAinr, Lzmitbb, La Bbllb Smtvaob, LosBoir. E.C.4

10.686
